Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page

Thank you for buying this
Henry Holt and Company ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available
in any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you
believe the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the
author’s copyright, please notify the publisher at:
us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.

INTRODUCTION, WITH CATS

Let’s start with cats.
Cats are everywhere online. They make the memiest memes and
the cutest videos.
Why cats more than dogs?1
Dogs didn’t come to ancient humans begging to live with us; we
domesticated them.2 They’ve been bred to be obedient. They take to
training and they are predictable. They work for us. That’s not to say
anything against dogs.3 It’s great that they’re loyal and dependable.
Cats are different. They came along and partly domesticated
themselves. They are not predictable. Popular dog videos tend to
show off training, while the most wildly popular cat videos are the
ones that capture weird and surprising behaviors.
Cats are smart, but not a great choice if you want an animal that
takes to training reliably. Watch a cat circus online, and what’s so
touching is that the cats are clearly making their own minds up about
whether to do a trick they’ve learned, or to do nothing, or to wander
into the audience.
Cats have done the seemingly impossible: They’ve integrated
themselves into the modern high-tech world without giving
themselves up. They are still in charge. There is no worry that some
stealthy meme crafted by algorithms and paid for by a creepy,
hidden oligarch has taken over your cat. No one has taken over your
cat; not you, not anyone.

Oh, how we long to have that certainty not just about our cats, but
about ourselves! Cats on the internet are our hopes and dreams for
the future of people on the internet.
Meanwhile, even though we love dogs, we don’t want to be dogs,
at least in terms of power relationships with people, and we’re afraid
Facebook and the like are turning us into dogs. When we are
triggered to do something crappy online, we might call it a response
to a “dog whistle.” Dog whistles can only be heard by dogs. We
worry that we’re falling under stealthy control.
This book is about how to be a cat. How can you remain
autonomous in a world where you are under constant surveillance
and are constantly prodded by algorithms run by some of the richest
corporations in history, which have no way of making money except
by being paid to manipulate your behavior? How can you be a cat,
despite that?
The title doesn’t lie; this book presents ten arguments for deleting
all your social media accounts. I hope it helps, but even if you agree
with all ten of my arguments, you might still decide to keep some of
your accounts. That’s part of your prerogative, being a cat.
As I present the ten arguments, I’ll discuss some of the ways you
might think about your situation to decide what’s best for you. But
only you can know.
AUTHOR’S NOTE, MARCH 2018:
This book was written primarily during the final months of 2017, but
events in 2018 turned out to be explosively relevant. The manuscript
was done, done, done—headed to the printer—when the sorry
revelations of the Cambridge Analytica scandal fueled a sudden,
grassroots movement of people deleting Facebook accounts.
Unfortunately, not all public figures and thought leaders handled
the moment with the courage that was required. There were pundits
who tried to quit but could not. There were others who pointed out
that not everyone is privileged enough to quit, so it felt cruel to leave
the less fortunate behind. Others said it was irrelevant to quit
because the thing that mattered was pressuring governments to

regulate Facebook. Overall, the attitude of professional
commentators regarding account deleters was smug and dismissive.
And dead wrong.
C’mon people! Yes, being able to quit is a privilege; many
genuinely can’t. But if you have the latitude to quit and don’t, you are
not supporting the less fortunate; you are only reinforcing the system
in which many people are trapped. I am living proof that you can
have a public life in media without social media accounts. Those of
us with options must explore those options or they will remain only
theoretical. Business follows money, so we who have options have
power and responsibility. You, you, you have the affirmative
responsibility to invent and demonstrate ways to live without the crap
that is destroying society. Quitting is the only way, for now, to learn
what can replace our grand mistake.

ARGUMENT ONE

YOU ARE LOSING YOUR FREE WILL

WELCOME TO THE CAGE THAT GOES EVERYWHERE WITH
YOU

Something entirely new is happening in the world. Just in the last five
or ten years, nearly everyone started to carry a little device called a
smartphone on their person all the time that’s suitable for algorithmic
behavior modification. A lot of us are also using related devices
called smart speakers on our kitchen counters or in our car
dashboards. We’re being tracked and measured constantly, and
receiving engineered feedback all the time. We’re being hypnotized
little by little by technicians we can’t see, for purposes we don’t
know. We’re all lab animals now.
Algorithms gorge on data about you, every second. What kinds of
links do you click on? What videos do you watch all the way
through? How quickly are you moving from one thing to the next?
Where are you when you do these things? Who are you connecting
with in person and online? What facial expressions do you make?
How does your skin tone change in different situations? What were
you doing just before you decided to buy something or not? Whether
to vote or not?
All these measurements and many others have been matched up
with similar readings about the lives of multitudes of other people
through massive spying. Algorithms correlate what you do with what
almost everyone else has done.

The algorithms don’t really understand you, but there is power in
numbers, especially in large numbers. If a lot of other people who
like the foods you like were also more easily put off by pictures of a
candidate portrayed in a pink border instead of a blue one, then you
probably will be too, and no one needs to know why. Statistics are
reliable, but only as idiot demons.
Are you sad, lonely, scared? Happy, confident? Getting your
period? Experiencing a peak of class anxiety?
So-called advertisers can seize the moment when you are
perfectly primed and then influence you with messages that have
worked on other people who share traits and situations with you.
I say “so-called” because it’s just not right to call direct
manipulation of people advertising. Advertisers used to have a
limited chance to make a pitch, and that pitch might have been
sneaky or annoying, but it was fleeting. Furthermore, lots of people
saw the same TV or print ad; it wasn’t adapted to individuals. The
biggest difference was that you weren’t monitored and assessed all
the time so that you could be fed dynamically optimized stimuli—
whether “content” or ad—to engage and alter you.
Now everyone who is on social media is getting individualized,
continuously adjusted stimuli, without a break, so long as they use
their smartphones. What might once have been called advertising
must now be understood as continuous behavior modification on a
titanic scale.
Please don’t be insulted. Yes, I am suggesting that you might be
turning, just a little, into a well-trained dog, or something less
pleasant, like a lab rat or a robot. That you’re being remotecontrolled, just a little, by clients of big corporations. But if I’m right,
then becoming aware of it might just free you, so give this a chance,
okay?
A scientific movement called behaviorism arose before computers
were invented. Behaviorists studied new, more methodical, sterile,
and nerdy ways to train animals and humans.
One famous behaviorist was B. F. Skinner. He set up a
methodical system, known as a Skinner box, in which caged animals
got treats when they did something specific. There wasn’t anyone

petting or whispering to the animal, just a purely isolated mechanical
action—a new kind of training for modern times. Various
behaviorists, who often gave off rather ominous vibes, applied this
method to people. Behaviorist strategies often worked, which
freaked everyone out, eventually leading to a bunch of creepy “mind
control” sci-fi and horror movie scripts.
An unfortunate fact is that you can train someone using
behaviorist techniques, and the person doesn’t even know it. Until
very recently, this rarely happened unless you signed up to be a test
subject in an experiment in the basement of a university’s
psychology building. Then you’d go into a room and be tested while
someone watched you through a one-way mirror. Even though you
knew an experiment was going on, you didn’t realize how you were
being manipulated. At least you gave consent to be manipulated in
some way. (Well, not always. There were all kinds of cruel
experiments performed on prisoners, on poor people, and especially
on racial targets.)
This book argues in ten ways that what has become suddenly
normal—pervasive surveillance and constant, subtle manipulation—
is unethical, cruel, dangerous, and inhumane. Dangerous? Oh, yes,
because who knows who’s going to use that power, and for what?
THE MAD SCIENTIST TURNS OUT TO CARE ABOUT THE DOG IN
THE CAGE

You may have heard the mournful confessions from the founders of
social media empires, which I prefer to call “behavior modification
empires.”
Here’s Sean Parker, the first president of Facebook:
We need to sort of give you a little dopamine hit every once in a while,
because someone liked or commented on a photo or a post or whatever.
… It’s a social-validation feedback loop … exactly the kind of thing that a
hacker like myself would come up with, because you’re exploiting a
vulnerability in human psychology.… The inventors, creators—it’s me, it’s
Mark [Zuckerberg], it’s Kevin Systrom on Instagram, it’s all of these
people—understood this consciously. And we did it anyway … it literally

changes your relationship with society, with each other.… It probably
interferes with productivity in weird ways. God only knows what it’s doing
to our children’s brains.1

Here’s Chamath Palihapitiya, former vice president of user growth
at Facebook:
The short-term, dopamine-driven feedback loops we’ve created are
destroying how society works.… No civil discourse, no cooperation;
misinformation, mistruth. And it’s not an American problem—this is not
about Russian ads. This is a global problem.… I feel tremendous guilt. I
think we all knew in the back of our minds—even though we feigned this
whole line of, like, there probably aren’t any bad unintended
consequences. I think in the back, deep, deep recesses of, we kind of
knew something bad could happen.… So we are in a really bad state of
affairs right now, in my opinion. It is eroding the core foundation of how
people behave by and between each other. And I don’t have a good
solution. My solution is I just don’t use these tools anymore. I haven’t for
years.2

Better late than never. Plenty of critics like me have been warning
that bad stuff was happening for a while now, but to hear this from
the people who did the stuff is progress, a step forward.
For years, I had to endure quite painful criticism from friends in
Silicon Valley because I was perceived as a traitor for criticizing what
we were doing. Lately I have the opposite problem. I argue that
Silicon Valley people are for the most part decent, and I ask that we
not be villainized; I take a lot of fresh heat for that. Whether I’ve been
too hard or too soft on my community is hard to know.
The more important question now is whether anyone’s criticism
will matter. It’s undeniably out in the open that a bad technology is
doing us harm, but will we—will you, meaning you—be able to resist
and help steer the world to a better place?
Companies like Facebook, Google, and Twitter are finally trying to
fix some of the massive problems they created, albeit in a piecemeal
way. Is it because they are being pressured or because they feel that
it’s the right thing to do? Probably a little of both.

The companies are changing policies, hiring humans to monitor
what’s going on, and hiring data scientists to come up with
algorithms to avoid the worst failings. Facebook’s old mantra was
“Move fast and break things,”3 and now they’re coming up with better
mantras and picking up a few pieces from a shattered world and
gluing them together.
This book will argue that the companies on their own can’t do
enough to glue the world back together.
Because people in Silicon Valley are expressing regrets, you
might think that now you just need to wait for us to fix the problem.
That’s not how things work. If you aren’t part of the solution, there
will be no solution.
This first argument will introduce a few key concepts behind the
design of addictive and manipulative network services. Awareness is
the first step to freedom.
CARROT AND SHTICK

Parker says Facebook intentionally got people addicted, while
Palihapitiya is saying something about the negative effects on
relationships and society. What is the connection between these two
mea culpas?
The core process that allows social media to make money and
that also does the damage to society is behavior modification.
Behavior modification entails methodical techniques that change
behavioral patterns in animals and people. It can be used to treat
addictions, but it can also be used to create them.
The damage to society comes because addiction makes people
crazy. The addict gradually loses touch with the real world and real
people. When many people are addicted to manipulative schemes,
the world gets dark and crazy.
Addiction is a neurological process that we don’t understand
completely. The neurotransmitter dopamine plays a role in pleasure
and is thought to be central to the mechanism of behavior change in
response to getting rewards. That is why Parker brings it up.

Behavior modification, especially the modern kind implemented
with gadgets like smartphones, is a statistical effect, meaning it’s real
but not comprehensively reliable; over a population, the effect is
more or less predictable, but for each individual it’s impossible to
say. To a degree, you’re an animal in a behaviorist’s experimental
cage. But the fact that something is fuzzy or approximate does not
make it unreal.
Originally, food treats were the most common reward used in
behaviorist experiments, though the practice goes back to ancient
times. Every animal trainer uses them, slipping a little treat to a dog
after it has performed a trick. Many parents of young children do it,
too.
One of the first behaviorists, Ivan Pavlov, famously demonstrated
that he didn’t need to use real food. He would ring a bell when a dog
was fed, and eventually the dog would salivate upon hearing the bell
alone.
Using symbols instead of real rewards has become an essential
trick in the behavior modification toolbox. For instance, a smartphone
game like Candy Crush uses shiny images of candy instead of real
candy to become addictive. Other addictive video games might use
shiny images of coins or other treasure.
Addictive pleasure and reward patterns in the brain—the “little
dopamine hit” cited by Sean Parker—are part of the basis of social
media addiction, but not the whole story, because social media also
uses punishment and negative reinforcement.
Various kinds of punishment have been used in behaviorist labs;
electric shocks were popular for a while. But just as with rewards, it’s
not necessary for punishments to be real and physical. Sometimes
experiments deny a subject points or tokens.
You are getting the equivalent of both treats and electric shocks
when you use social media.
Most users of social media have experienced catfishing4 (which
cats hate), senseless rejection, being belittled or ignored, outright
sadism, or all of the above, and worse. Just as the carrot and stick

work together, unpleasant feedback can play as much of a role in
addiction and sneaky behavior modification as the pleasant kind.
THE ALLURE OF MYSTERY

When Parker uses the phrase “every once in a while,” he’s probably
referring to one of the curious phenomena that behaviorists
discovered while studying both animals and people. If someone gets
a reward—whether it’s positive social regard or a piece of candy—
whenever they do a particular thing, then they’ll tend to do more of
that thing. When people get a flattering response in exchange for
posting something on social media, they get in the habit of posting
more.
That sounds innocent enough, but it can be the first stage of an
addiction that becomes a problem both for individuals and society.
Even though Silicon Valley types have a sanitized name for this
phase, “engagement,” we fear it enough to keep our own children
away from it. Many of the Silicon Valley kids I know attend Waldorf
schools, which generally forbid electronics.
Back to the surprising phenomenon: it’s not that positive and
negative feedback work, but that somewhat random or unpredictable
feedback can be more engaging than perfect feedback.
If you get a piece of candy immediately every time you say please
as a child, you’ll probably start saying please more often. But
suppose once in a while the candy doesn’t come. You might guess
that you’d start saying please less often. After all, it’s not generating
the reward as reliably as it used to.
But sometimes the opposite thing happens. It’s as if your brain, a
born pattern finder, can’t resist the challenge. “There must be some
additional trick to it,” murmurs your obsessive brain. You keep on
pleasing, hoping that a deeper pattern will reveal itself, even though
there’s nothing but bottomless randomness.
It’s healthy for a scientist to be fascinated by a pattern that
doesn’t quite make sense. Maybe that means there’s something
deeper to be discovered. And it’s a great tool to exploit if you’re

writing a script. A little incongruity makes a plot or a character more
fascinating.
But in many situations it’s a terrible basis for fascination. The
allure of glitchy feedback is probably what draws a lot of people into
crummy “codependent” relationships in which they aren’t treated
well.
A touch of randomness is more than easy to generate in social
media: because the algorithms aren’t perfect, randomness is
intrinsic. But beyond that, feeds are usually calculated to include an
additional degree of intentional randomness. The motivation
originally came from basic math, not human psychology.
Social media algorithms are usually “adaptive,” which means they
constantly make small changes to themselves in order to try to get
better results; “better” in this case meaning more engaging and
therefore more profitable. A little randomness is always present in
this type of algorithm.
Let’s suppose an algorithm is showing you an opportunity to buy
socks or stocks about five seconds after you see a cat video that
makes you happy. An adaptive algorithm will occasionally perform an
automatic test to find out what happens if the interval is changed to,
say, four and a half seconds. Did that make you more likely to buy? If
so, that timing adjustment might be applied not only to your future
feed, but to the feeds of thousands of other people who seem
correlated with you because of anything from color preferences to
driving patterns.5
Adaptive algorithms can get stuck sometimes; if an algorithm gets
no further benefits from further small tweaks to its settings, then
further small tweaks won’t stick. If changing to four and a half
seconds makes you less likely to buy socks, but five and a half
seconds also makes sales less likely, then the timing will remain at
five seconds. On the basis of available evidence, five seconds would
be the best possible time to wait. If no small random change helps,
then the algorithm stops adapting. But adaptive algorithms aren’t
supposed to stop adapting.

Suppose changing even more might improve the result? Maybe
two and a half seconds would be better, for instance. But incremental
tweaks wouldn’t reveal that, because the algorithm got stuck at the
five-second setting. That’s why adaptive algorithms also often
include a sparser dose of greater randomness. Every once in while
an algorithm finds better settings by being jarred out of merely okay
settings.6
Adaptive systems often include such a leaping mechanism. An
example is the occurrence of useful mutations in natural evolution,
which is usually animated by more incremental selection-based
events in which the genes from an individual are either passed along
or not. A mutation is a wild card that adds new possibilities, a jarring
jump. Every once in a while a mutation adds a weird, new, and
enhancing feature to a species.
Neuroscientists naturally wonder whether a similar process is
happening within the human brain. Our brains surely include
adaptive processes; brains might be adapted to seek out surprises,
because nature abhors a rut.
When an algorithm is feeding experiences to a person, it turns out
that the randomness that lubricates algorithmic adaptation can also
feed human addiction. The algorithm is trying to capture the perfect
parameters for manipulating a brain, while the brain, in order to seek
out deeper meaning, is changing in response to the algorithm’s
experiments; it’s a cat-and-mouse game based on pure math.
Because the stimuli from the algorithm don’t mean anything,
because they genuinely are random, the brain isn’t adapting to
anything real, but to a fiction. That process—of becoming hooked on
an elusive mirage—is addiction. As the algorithm tries to escape a
rut, the human mind becomes stuck in one.
The pioneers of the online exploitation of this intersection of math
and the human brain were not the social media companies, but the
creators of digital gambling machines like video poker, and then of
online gambling sites. Occasionally, pioneers of the gambling world
complain about how social media companies ripped off their ideas

and made more money, but mostly they talk about how social media
is helping them identify the easiest marks.7
HEAVEN AND HELL ARE MADE OF OTHER PEOPLE8

Social networks bring in another dimension of stimuli: social
pressure.
People are keenly sensitive to social status, judgment, and
competition. Unlike most animals, people are not only born
absolutely helpless, but also remain so for years. We only survive by
getting along with family members and others. Social concerns are
not optional features of the human brain. They are primal.
The power of what other people think has proven to be intense
enough to modify the behavior of subjects participating in famous
studies like the Milgram Experiment and the Stanford Prison
Experiment. Normal, noncriminal people were coerced into doing
horrible things, such as torturing others, through no mechanism
other than social pressure.
On social networks, the manipulation of social emotions has been
the easiest way to generate rewards and punishments. That might
change someday, if drones start dropping actual candy from the sky
when you do what the algorithm wants, but for now it’s all about
feelings that can be evoked in you—mostly, feelings regarding what
other people think.
For instance, when we are afraid that we might not be considered
cool, attractive, or high-status, we don’t feel good. That fear is a
profound emotion. It hurts.9
Everybody suffers from social anxiety from time to time, and every
child has encountered a bully who used social anxiety as a weapon
of torture, probably because behaving like a bully lessened the
chances that the bully might become a target. That’s why people,
even those who would normally be decent, tend to pile on to a victim
of social anxiety torture. They’re so afraid of the very real pain that
social anxiety brings that they can lose sight of their better natures
for a moment.

That’s not to say that all social emotions are negative. We can
also experience camaraderie, sympathy, respect, admiration,
gratitude, hope, empathy, closeness, attraction, and a world of other
positive feelings when we interact with other people. On the negative
side, we might feel fear, hostility, anxiety, resentment, repulsion,
jealousy, and a desire to ridicule.
If socially evoked emotion can function as punishment or reward,
then is reward or punishment more effective at changing people?
This question has been studied for a long time, and it seems that the
answer varies according to the population being studied and the
situation. Here’s a study that suggests that young children respond
better to reward than punishment, though the reverse might be the
case after age twelve.10 Here’s another study that suggests that
punishment is more effective than reward for manipulating college
students.11 Here’s a summary of research indicating that affirmation
works better to motivate adult workers.12 It might be that the nature
of the task determines which type of feedback is more effective,13 as
does the way the task is described.14
A corpus of academic research compares the powers of positive
and negative feedback, but that is not the key question for the design
of commercial social media platforms, which are primarily concerned
with reducing costs and increasing performance, thereby maximizing
profit. Whether or not positive feedback might in theory be more
effective in certain cases, negative feedback turns out to be the
bargain feedback, the best choice for business, so it appears more
often in social media.
Negative emotions such as fear and anger well up more easily
and dwell in us longer than positive ones. It takes longer to build
trust than to lose trust. Fight-or-flight responses occur in seconds,
while it can take hours to relax.
This is true in real life, but it is even more true in the flattened light
of algorithms.
There is no evil genius seated in a cubicle in a social media
company performing calculations and deciding that making people
feel bad is more “engaging” and therefore more profitable than

making them feel good. Or at least, I’ve never met or heard of such a
person.
The prime directive to be engaging reinforces itself, and no one
even notices that negative emotions are being amplified more than
positive ones. Engagement is not meant to serve any particular
purpose other than its own enhancement, and yet the result is an
unnatural global amplification of the “easy” emotions, which happen
to be the negative ones.
BIT AS BAIT

In the bigger picture, in which people must do more than conform in
order for our species to thrive, behaviorism is an inadequate way to
think about society. If you want to motivate high value and creative
outcomes, as opposed to undertaking rote training, then reward and
punishment aren’t the right tools at all.
There’s a long line of researchers studying this topic, starting with
Abraham Maslow in the 1950s and continuing with many others,
including Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (joined by writers like Daniel Pink).
Instead of applying the simple mechanisms of behaviorism, we need
to think about people in more creative ways, if we expect them to be
creative. We need to foster joy, intellectual challenge, individuality,
curiosity, and other qualities that don’t fit into a tidy chart.
But there’s something about the rigidity of digital technology, the
on-and-off nature of the bit, that attracts the behaviorist way of
thinking. Reward and punishment are like one and zero. It’s not
surprising that B. F. Skinner was a major player in the earliest days
of digital networking, for instance.15 He saw digital networks as an
ideal way to train a population for the kind of utopia he sought, where
we’d all just finally behave. One of his books was called Beyond
Freedom and Dignity. Beyond!
The term “engagement” is part of the familiar, sanitized language
that hides how stupid a machine we have built. We must start using
terms like “addiction” and “behavior modification.” Here’s another
example of sanitized language: We still call the customers of social
media companies “advertisers”—and, to be fair, many of them are.

They want you to buy a particular brand of soap or something. But
they might also be nasty, hidden creeps who want to undermine
democracy. So I prefer to call this class of person a manipulator.
Sorry, soap sellers.… Actually, I can report, the people at
companies like Procter & Gamble are just fine—I’ve met a bunch of
them—and their world would be happier if they weren’t beholden to
social media companies.
Back in its earliest days, online advertising really was just
advertising. But before long, advances in computing happened to
coincide with ridiculously perverse financial incentives, as will be
explained in the next argument. What started as advertising
morphed into what would better be called “empires of behavior
modification for rent.” That transformation has often attracted new
kinds of customers/manipulators, and they aren’t pretty.
Unfortunately, manipulators can’t get any result they want with
equal ease. You can’t pay social media companies to help end wars
and make everyone kind. Social media is biased, not to the Left or
the Right, but downward. The relative ease of using negative
emotions for the purposes of addiction and manipulation makes it
relatively easier to achieve undignified results. An unfortunate
combination of biology and math favors degradation of the human
world. Information warfare units sway elections, hate groups recruit,
and nihilists get amazing bang for the buck when they try to bring
society down.
The unplanned nature of the transformation from advertising to
direct behavior modification caused an explosive amplification of
negativity in human affairs. We’ll return to the higher potency of
negative emotions in behavior modification many times as we
explore the personal, political, economic, social, and cultural effects
of social media.
ADDICTION, MEET NETWORK EFFECT

Addiction is a big part of the reason why so many of us accept being
spied on and manipulated by our information technology, but it’s not
the only reason. Digital networks genuinely deliver value to us. They

allow for great efficiencies and convenience. That’s why so many of
us worked so hard to make them possible.
Once you can use a pocket device to order rides and food and
find out where to meet your friends right away, it’s hard to go back.
It’s hard to remember that people with rare medical conditions used
to have no way of finding other people in the same boat, so there
was no one to talk to about unusual problems. What a blessing that it
has become possible.
But the benefits of networks only appear when people use the
same platform. If no one wanted to be an Uber driver, then your Uber
app would accomplish exactly nothing. If no one wants to be on your
dating app, then, once again, nothing.
The unfortunate result is that once an app starts to work,
everyone is stuck with it. It’s hard to quit a particular social network
and go to a different one, because everyone you know is already on
the first one. It’s effectively impossible for everyone in a society to
back up all their data, move simultaneously, and restore their
memories at the same time.
Effects of this kind are called network effects or lock-ins. They’re
hard to avoid on digital networks.
Originally, many of us who worked on scaling the internet16 hoped
that the thing that would bring people together—that would gain
network effect and lock-in—would be the internet itself. But there
was a libertarian wind blowing, so we left out many key functions.
The internet in itself didn’t include a mechanism for personal identity,
for instance. Each computer has its own code number, but people
aren’t represented at all. Similarly, the internet in itself doesn’t give
you any place to store even a small amount of persistent information,
any way to make or receive payments, or any way to find other
people you might have something in common with.
Everyone knew that these functions and many others would be
needed. We figured it would be wiser to let entrepreneurs fill in the
blanks than to leave that task to government. What we didn’t
consider was that fundamental digital needs like the ones I just listed
would lead to new kinds of massive monopolies because of network

effects and lock-in. We foolishly laid the foundations for global
monopolies. We did their hardest work for them. More precisely,
since you’re the product, not the customer of social media, the
proper word is “monopsonies.”17 Our early libertarian idealism
resulted in gargantuan, global data monopsonies.
One of the main reasons to delete your social media accounts is
that there isn’t a real choice to move to different social media
accounts. Quitting entirely is the only option for change. If you don’t
quit, you are not creating the space in which Silicon Valley can act to
improve itself.
ADDICTION AND FREE WILL ARE OPPOSITES

Addiction gradually turns you into a zombie. Zombies don’t have free
will. Once again, this result isn’t total but statistical. You become
more like a zombie, more of the time, than you otherwise would be.
There’s no need to believe in some myth of perfect people who
are completely free of addictions. They don’t exist. You’re not going
to become perfect or perfectly free, no matter how many self-help
books you read or how many addictive services you quit.
There’s no such thing as perfectly free will. Our brains are
constantly changing their ways to adapt to a changing environment.
It’s hard work, and brains get tired! Sometimes they take a break,
zone out, and run on autopilot. But that’s different from being driven
by hidden manipulators.
We modify each other’s behavior all the time, and that’s a good
thing. You’d have to be insensitive and uncaring to not change how
you act around someone in response to how that person reacts.
When mutual behavior modification gets good, it might be part of
what we talk about when we talk about love.
We don’t have to think of free will as a supernatural intervention in
our universe. Maybe free will exists when our adaptation to each
other and the world has an exceptionally creative quality.
So the problem isn’t behavior modification in itself. The problem is
relentless, robotic, ultimately meaningless behavior modification in
the service of unseen manipulators and uncaring algorithms.

Hypnosis might be therapeutic so long as you trust your hypnotist,
but who would trust a hypnotist who is working for unknown third
parties? Who? Apparently billions of people.
Consider the billions of dollars taken in by Facebook, Google, and
the rest of the so-called digital advertising industry every month. The
vast majority of that money comes from parties who are seeking to
change your behavior, and who believe they are getting results.
Many of these behavior changes are similar to the ones that
television ads try to provoke, like getting you to buy a car or go to a
café.
But, despite in some ways knowing more about you than you
know about yourself, the companies don’t always know the identities
of the advertisers, the parties who are benefiting from manipulating
you. Tech company lawyers have testified under oath that the
companies couldn’t have known when Russian intelligence services
sought to disrupt elections or foment divisions to weaken societies,
for instance.18
I find that paranoid thinking is generally counterproductive. It
disempowers you. But consider the present situation. We know that
social media has been successfully deployed to disrupt societies,19
and we know that the price to do so is remarkably low. We know that
relevant companies take in an astounding amount of money and that
they don’t always know who their customers are. Therefore, there
are likely to be actors manipulating us—manipulating you—who
have not been revealed.
To free yourself, to be more authentic, to be less addicted, to be
less manipulated, to be less paranoid … for all these marvelous
reasons, delete your accounts.

ARGUMENT TWO

QUITTING SOCIAL MEDIA IS THE MOST FINELY
TARGETED WAY TO RESIST THE INSANITY OF
OUR TIMES

THE BUMMER MACHINE

It might not seem like it at first, but I’m an optimist. I don’t think we
have to throw the whole digital world away. A lot of it’s great!
The problem isn’t the smartphone, as suggested by a flood of
articles with titles like “Has the Smartphone Destroyed a
Generation?”1 The problem isn’t the internet, which is also routinely
accused of ruining the world.2
Something is ruining the world, but it isn’t that we’re connecting
with people at a distance using bits, or that we’re staring into little
glowing screens. To be sure, you can overdo staring at the little
screen,3 just as you can overdo a lot of things, but that’s not an
existential problem for our species.
There is one particular high-tech thing, however, that is toxic even
in small quantities. One new development that must be quashed. It’s
important to define the problem as accurately as possible, lest we
confuse ourselves even more.
The problem is in part that we are all carrying around devices that
are suitable for mass behavior modification. But that’s not quite the
right framing of our problem. After all, our devices can be used for
other purposes, and often are.

The problem is not only that users are crammed into online
environments that can bring out the worst in us. It’s not only that so
much power has concentrated into a tiny number of hands that
control giant cloud computers.
The problem intersects with all those factors, but even that
conglomeration isn’t exactly the problem.
The problem occurs when all the phenomena I’ve just described
are driven by a business model in which the incentive is to find
customers ready to pay to modify someone else’s behavior.
Remember, with old-fashioned advertising, you could measure
whether a product did better after an ad was run, but now companies
are measuring whether individuals changed their behaviors, and the
feeds for each person are constantly tweaked to get individual
behavior to change. Your specific behavior change has been turned
into a product. It’s a particularly “engaging” product not just for users,
but for customers/manipulators, because they worry that if they don’t
pay up, they’ll be left out in the cold.
The problem is all of the above plus one more thing. As explained
in the first argument, the scheme I am describing amplifies negative
emotions more than positive ones, so it’s more efficient at harming
society than at improving it: creepier customers get more bang for
their buck.
Finally, we can draw a circle around the problem. That means we
can kill it without collateral damage. Our problem is blessedly
specific.
If we could just get rid of the deleterious business model, then the
underlying technology might not be so bad. At least, we have to try,
because otherwise we’ll eventually have to gut a whole universe of
digital technology. Tech was the last “god that hadn’t failed,”4 the last
bastion of optimism. We can’t afford to ditch it.
If you have good experiences with social media, nothing in this
book invalidates those experiences. In fact, my hope is that we—
meaning both the industry and all of us—will find a way to keep and
improve on what we love precisely by being precise about what must

be rejected. Deleting your accounts now will improve the chances
that you’ll have access to better experiences in the future.
Some have compared social media to the tobacco industry,5 but I
will not. The better analogy is paint that contains lead. When it
became undeniable that lead was harmful, no one declared that
houses should never be painted again. Instead, after pressure and
legislation, lead-free paints became the new standard.6 Smart
people simply waited to buy paint until there was a safe version on
sale. Similarly, smart people should delete their accounts until
nontoxic varieties are available.
I speak as a computer scientist, not as a social scientist or
psychologist. From that perspective, I can see that time is running
out. The world is changing rapidly under our command, so doing
nothing is not an option. We don’t have as much in the way of
rigorous science as would be ideal for understanding our situation,
but we have enough results to describe the problem we must solve,
just not a lot of time in which to solve it.
Seems like a good moment to coin an acronym so I don’t have to
repeat, over and over, the same account of the pieces that make up
the problem. How about “Behaviors of Users Modified, and Made
into an Empire for Rent”? BUMMER.
BUMMER is a machine, a statistical machine that lives in the
computing clouds. To review, phenomena that are statistical and
fuzzy are nevertheless real. Even at their best, BUMMER algorithms
can only calculate the chances that a person will act in a particular
way. But what might be only a chance for each person approaches
being a certainty on the average for large numbers of people. The
overall population can be affected with greater predictability than can
any single person.
Since BUMMER’s influence is statistical, the menace is a little like
climate change. You can’t say climate change is responsible for a
particular storm, flood, or drought, but you can say it changes the
odds that they’ll happen. In the longer term, the most horrible stuff
like sea level rise and the need to relocate most people and find new

sources of food would be attributable to climate change, but by then
the argument would have been lost.
Similarly, I can’t prove that any particular asshole has been made
more asshole-y by BUMMER, nor can I prove that any particular
degradation of our society would not have happened anyway.
There’s no certain way to know if BUMMER has changed your
behavior, though later on I’ll offer some ways to find clues. If you use
BUMMER platforms, you’ve probably been changed at least a little.
While we can’t know what details in our world would be different
without BUMMER, we can know about the big picture. Like climate
change, BUMMER will lead us into hell if we don’t self-correct.
THE PARTS THAT MAKE UP THE BUMMER MACHINE

BUMMER is a machine with six moving parts.
Here’s a mnemonic for the six components of the BUMMER
machine, in case you ever have to remember them for a test:
A is for Attention Acquisition leading to Asshole supremacy
B is for Butting into everyone’s lives
C is for Cramming content down people’s throats
D is for Directing people’s behaviors in the sneakiest way possible
E is for Earning money from letting the worst assholes secretly screw
with everyone else
F is for Fake mobs and Faker society
Here’s a description of each part.
A is for Attention Acquisition leading to Asshole supremacy
People often get weird and nasty online. This bizarre phenomenon
surprised everyone in the earliest days of networking, and it has had
a profound effect on our world. While not every online experience is
nasty, the familiar nastiness colors and bounds the overall online
experience. Nastiness also turned out to be like crude oil for the
social media companies and other behavior manipulation empires

that quickly came to dominate the internet, because it fueled
negative behavioral feedback.
Why does the nastiness happen? This will be explored in the next
argument. In brief: Ordinary people are brought together in a setting
in which the main—or often the only—reward that’s available is
attention. They can’t reasonably expect to earn money, for instance.
Ordinary users can gain only fake power and wealth, not real power
or wealth. So mind games become dominant.
With nothing else to seek but attention, ordinary people tend to
become assholes, because the biggest assholes get the most
attention. This inherent bias toward assholedom flavors the action of
all the other parts of the BUMMER machine.
B is for Butting into everyone’s lives
Component B was already introduced in the first argument.
Everyone is placed under a level of surveillance straight out of a
dystopian science fiction novel. Pervasive spying could theoretically
exist without the asshole-generating platforms in component A, but
as it happens, the world we have created connects the two
components most of the time.
Spying is accomplished mostly through connected personal
devices—especially, for now, smartphones—that people keep
practically glued to their bodies. Data are gathered about each
person’s communications, interests, movements, contact with others,
emotional reactions to circumstances, facial expressions, purchases,
vital signs: an ever growing, boundless variety of data.
If you’re reading this on an electronic device, for instance, there’s
a good chance an algorithm is keeping a record of data such as how
fast you read or when you take a break to check something else.
Algorithms correlate data from each person and between people.
The correlations are effectively theories about the nature of each
person, and those theories are constantly measured and rated for
how predictive they are. Like all well-managed theories, they
improve over time through adaptive feedback.

C is for Cramming content down people’s throats
Algorithms choose what each person experiences through their
devices. This component might be called a feed, a recommendation
engine, or personalization.
Component C means each person sees different things. The
immediate motivation is to deliver stimuli for individualized behavior
modification.
BUMMER makes it harder to understand why others think and act
the way they do. The effects of this component will be examined
more in the arguments about how you are losing access to truth and
the capacity for empathy.
(Not all personalization is part of BUMMER. When Netflix
recommends a movie or eBay recommends something for you to
buy, it isn’t BUMMER. It only becomes BUMMER in connection with
other components. Neither Netflix nor eBay is being paid by third
parties to influence your behavior apart from the immediate business
you do with each site.)
D is for Directing people’s behaviors in the sneakiest way possible
The above elements are connected to create a measurement and
feedback machine that deliberately modifies behavior. The process
was described in the first argument.
To review: Customized feeds become optimized to “engage” each
user, often with emotionally potent cues, leading to addiction. People
don’t realize how they are being manipulated. The default purpose of
manipulation is to get people more and more glued in, and to get
them to spend more and more time in the system.7 But other
purposes for manipulation are also tested.
For instance, if you’re reading on a device, your reading
behaviors will be correlated with those of multitudes of other people.
If someone who has a reading pattern similar to yours bought
something after it was pitched in a particular way, then the odds
become higher that you will get the same pitch. You might be
targeted before an election with weird posts that have proven to

bring out the inner cynic in people who are similar to you, in order to
reduce the chances that you’ll vote.
BUMMER platforms have proudly reported on how they’ve
experimented with making people sad, changing voter turnout, and
reinforcing brand loyalty. Indeed, these are some of the best-known
examples of research that were revealed in the formative days of
BUMMER.8
The digital network approach to behavior modification flattens all
these examples, all these different slices of life, into one slice. From
the point of view of the algorithm, emotions, happiness, and brand
loyalty are just different, but similar, signals to optimize.
If it turns out that certain kinds of posts make you sad, and an
algorithm is trying to make you sad, then there will be more such
posts. No one will necessarily ever know why those particular posts
had an effect on you, and you will probably not even notice that a
particular post made you a little sad, or that you were being
manipulated. The effect is subtle, but cumulative. While scientists
sometimes dive in to try to glean insights, for the most part the
process takes place in darkness, running on automatic; it’s a new
kind of sinister shadow cosmos.
The algorithms are rarely interrogated, least of all by external or
independent scientists, in part because it’s hard to understand why
they work. They improve automatically, through feedback. One of the
secrets of present-day Silicon Valley is that some people seem to be
better than others at getting machine learning schemes to work, and
no one understands why. The most mechanistic method of
manipulating human behavior turns out to be a surprisingly intuitive
art. Those who are good at massaging the latest algorithms become
stars and earn spectacular salaries.
E is for Earning money from letting the worst assholes secretly screw
with everyone else
The mass behavior modification machine is rented out to make
money. BUMMER manipulations are not perfect, but they are
powerful enough that it becomes suicidal for brands, politicians, and

other competitive entities to forgo payments to BUMMER machines.
Universal cognitive blackmail ensues, resulting in a rising global
spend on BUMMER.9
If someone isn’t paying a BUMMER platform in cash, then they
must turn themselves into data-fuel for that platform in order to not
be overwhelmed by it. When Facebook emphasized “news” in its
feed, the entire world of journalism had to reformulate itself to
BUMMER standards. To avoid being left out, journalists had to
create stories that emphasized clickbait and were detachable from
context. They were forced to become BUMMER in order to not be
annihilated by BUMMER.
BUMMER has not only darkened the ethics of Silicon Valley; it
has made the rest of the economy crazy. The economic side of
BUMMER will be explored in Argument Nine.
* * *
Before moving on to Component F, I must explain the special role
Component E plays in providing the financial incentives that keep the
whole BUMMER machine in motion. If you hang out in Silicon Valley,
you’ll hear a lot of chatter about how money is becoming obsolete,
how we’re creating forms of power and influence that transcend
money. Yet everybody still seems to be chasing money!
If owning everyone’s attention by making the world terrifying
happens to be what earns the most money, then that is what will
happen, even if it means that bad actors are amplified. If we want
something different to happen, then the way money is earned has to
change.
In the wake of the 2016 elections in the United States, Facebook,
Twitter, Google Search, and YouTube10 announced policy changes
to combat dark ads, malicious fake news, hate speech, and so on.
Regulators have also introduced requirements such as identifying
political advertisers. Just as I was finishing this book, Facebook
announced that it will deemphasize news in its feed; the journalism
world celebrated, for the most part, because now it might become
freer to connect to audiences on its own terms.

These changes might very well have a de-BUMMing effect, at
least for a while. Indeed, policy tweaks have improved nasty online
social phenomena before. Reddit banned some ugly subreddits in
2015, and the flow of hate-posting lessened.
But tweaking doesn’t undo the underlying incentives, so bad
actors are likely to invent ever sneakier and more sophisticated
countermeasures. That has also happened. To state the obvious,
there’s a rather vast industry called search engine optimization that’s
devoted to helping clients manipulate the constant policy changes at
search engines.
If the incentives remain unchanged, can incremental reforms
solve the problems of addiction, manipulation, and worldwide
insanity inducement that BUMMER has wrought? If limited reforms
can make a difference, I’m all for them, and I hope changes to
Facebook’s feed make the world a little better, but I fear tweaking
cannot achieve enough. That is one of my reasons for writing this
book.
Underlying incentives tend to overpower policies. The way that
people get around rules in order to chase incentives often makes the
world into a darker and more dangerous place. Prohibitions generally
don’t work. When the United States attempted to outlaw alcohol in
the early twentieth century, the result was a rise of organized crime.
The ban had to be rescinded. When marijuana was outlawed later in
the century, the same thing happened. Prohibitions are engines of
corruption that split societies into official and criminal sectors. Laws
work best when they are reasonably aligned with incentives.
Tweaking the rules of BUMMER without changing the underlying
incentives will probably meet a similar failure. Tweaks have already
failed: BUMMER pioneers like Google and Facebook have avidly
chased bad actors, fakers, and unsanctioned manipulators, and the
result has been the rise of technically accomplished, underground
cyber mafias, sometimes working for unfriendly states.
The most dispiriting side effect of BUMMER policy-tweaking is
that each cycle in the arms race between platforms and bad actors
motivates more and more well-meaning people to demand that
BUMMER companies take over more and more of our lives. We ask

remote, giant tech companies to govern hate speech, malicious
falsified news, bullying, racism, harassment, identity deception, and
other nasty things. Well-intentioned activists demand that
corporations govern behavior more and more. “Please tell us what
we can say, oh rich young programmers of Silicon Valley! Discipline
us!” The bad actors who wish to discredit democracy using the
BUMMER machine win even when losing ground to well-meaning
activists.
There are examples of unfortunate BUMMER incentives
throughout this book. Argument Nine proposes a different incentive
structure that might make the world better. Onward to Component F!
F is for Fake mobs and Faker society
This component is almost always present, even though it typically
wasn’t part of the initial design of a BUMMER machine. Fake people
are present in unknown but vast numbers and establish the
ambiance. Bots, AIs, agents, fake reviewers, fake friends, fake
followers, fake posters, automated catfishers: a menagerie of
wraiths.
Invisible social vandalism ensues. Social pressure, which is so
influential in human psychology and behavior, is synthesized.
The crucial role of fake people will be explored in the argument
about Truth, which comes after the next one about Assholes.
THE PROBLEM IS LIMITED, SO WE CAN CONTAIN IT

The more specifically we can draw a line around a problem, the
more solvable that problem becomes. Here I have put forward a
hypothesis that our problem is not the internet, smartphones, smart
speakers, or the art of algorithms. Instead, the problem that has
made the world so dark and crazy lately is the BUMMER machine,
and the core of the BUMMER machine is not a technology, exactly,
but a style of business plan that spews out perverse incentives and
corrupts people.

It’s not even a widely used business plan. Outside of China, the
only tech giants that fully depend on BUMMER are Facebook and
Google. The other three of the big five tech companies indulge in
BUMMER occasionally, because it is normalized these days, but
they don’t depend on it. A few smaller BUMMER companies are also
influential, like Twitter,11 though they often struggle. One of the
reasons I’m optimistic is that BUMMER isn’t great as a long-term
business strategy. I’ll explain that observation more in the argument
about economics.
Which companies are BUMMER? This can be debated! A good
way to tell is that first-rank BUMMER companies are the ones that
attract efforts or spending from bad actors like Russian state
intelligence warfare units. This test reveals that there are pseudoBUMMER services that contain only subsets of the components, like
Reddit and 4chan, but still play significant roles in the BUMMER
ecosystem.
Next-order services that might become BUMMER but haven’t
achieved scale are operated by the other tech giants, Microsoft,
Amazon, and Apple, as well as by smaller companies like Snap.
But this second argument is not about corporations, it’s about
you. Because we can draw a line around the BUMMER machine, we
can draw a line around what to avoid.
The problem with BUMMER is not that it includes any particular
technology, but that it’s someone else’s power trip.
Methodical behaviorism, described in the first argument, isn’t in
itself a problem, for instance. You might choose to be treated by a
cognitive behavioral therapist, and benefit from it. Hopefully that
therapist will have sworn an oath to uphold professional standards
and will earn your trust. If, however, your therapist is beholden to a
giant, remote corporation and is being paid to get you to make
certain decisions that aren’t necessarily in your own interests, then
that would be a BUMMER.
Similarly, hypnotism isn’t in itself a BUMMER. But if your hypnotist
is replaced by someone you don’t know who is working for someone

else you don’t know, and you have no way of knowing what you’re
being hypnotized to do, then that would be a BUMMER.
The problem isn’t any particular technology, but the use of
technology to manipulate people, to concentrate power in a way that
is so nuts and creepy that it becomes a threat to the survival of
civilization.
If you want to help make the world sane, you don’t need to give
up your smartphone, using computer cloud services, or visiting
websites. You don’t need to fear math, the social sciences, or
psychology.
BUMMER is the stuff to avoid. Delete your BUMMER accounts!

ARGUMENT THREE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU INTO AN
ASSHOLE

Let me rephrase this argument’s title. I don’t know you. I’m not
saying that you personally are definitely turning into an asshole, but
many people are, yet they seem to only see that many other people
are. I’ve seen myself start turning into an asshole online, and it was
scary and depressing.
So what I should really say is something like “You’re vulnerable to
gradually turning into an asshole, or statistically you might very well
be turning into an asshole. So, no offense, but please take the
possibility seriously.”
SOOTY SNOW

Addicts can try to hide an addiction, especially from themselves, but
often it shows. Personalities change.
The deeply addicted person’s rhythm becomes nervous, a
compulsive pecking at his situation; he’s always deprived, rushing for
affirmation. Addicts become anxious, strangely focused on
portentous events that aren’t visible to others. They are selfish, so
wrapped up in their cycle that they don’t have much time to notice
what others are feeling or thinking about. There’s an arrogance, a
fetish for exaggeration, that by all appearances is a cover for
profound insecurity. A personal mythology overtakes addicts. They

see themselves grandiosely and, as they descend further into
addiction, ever less realistically.
Hard-core social media addicts display these changes, just like
junkies or ruinous gamblers. More commonly, BUMMER users
become a little like this, statistically more likely to behave like an
addict at any given time. There are shades of gray, just as with
everything else about BUMMER. The whole society has darkened a
few shades as a result.
The most curious feature of the addict’s personality is that the
addict eventually seems to seek out suffering, since suffering is part
of the cycle of scratching the itch. A gambler is addicted not to
winning, exactly, but to the process in which losing is more likely. A
junkie is addicted not just to the high, but to the vertiginous
difference between the lows and the highs.
Similarly, a BUMMER addict eventually becomes preternaturally
quick to take offense, as if hoping to get into a spat.
Addicts also become aggressive, though they feel they are acting
out of necessity. The choice is to victimize or be a victim. Even
successful and pleasant BUMMER addicts, like top social media
influencers, have reported that they must not be too nice to others,
for that shows weakness1 in a highly competitive fishbowl. One must
be followed more than one follows, for appearances’ sake.
The characteristic personality change is hard to perceive or
acknowledge in oneself, but easier to see in others, especially if you
don’t like them. When conservative BUMMER addicts dislike liberal
college students with BUMMER addictions, they sometimes use the
insult “poor little snowflake.”
The poorest snowflake of them all, however, is Donald Trump,
who exhibits the same behavior. I met him a few times over several
decades, and I didn’t like him, but he wasn’t a BUMMER addict back
then. He was a New York City character, a manipulator, an actor, a
master at working the calculus of chums and outcasts. But as a
character he was in on his own joke. Even reality TV didn’t really
make him lose it.

As a Twitter addict, Trump has changed. He displays the
snowflake pattern and sometimes loses control. He is not acting like
the most powerful person in the world, because his addiction is more
powerful. Whatever else he might be, whatever kind of victimizer, he
is also a victim.
MEETING MY INNER TROLL

Many things about social media have changed over the years, but
the basic form was already around when I first got into computers in
the late 1970s. The social media we had back then amounted to little
more than commenting, just a bunch of people adding their text.
There wasn’t any voting for favorite posts, nor did algorithms
customize your feed. Very basic.
But I noticed something horrifying all those years ago.
Sometimes, out of nowhere, I would get into a fight with someone, or
a group of people. It was so weird. We’d start insulting each other,
trying to score points, getting under each other’s skin. And about
incredibly stupid stuff, like whether or not someone knew what they
were talking about when it came to brands of pianos. Really.
I’d stew between posts. “I am not ignorant! I know about pianos!
How dare that moron say those horrible things about me? I know, I’ll
ruin his reputation by tricking him into saying something stupid.”
This happened so often that it became normal. Not just for me,
but for everyone. It was chaotic human weather. There’d be a nice
morning and suddenly a storm would roll in.
In order to avoid falling into asshole behavior you had to make
yourself fake-nice. You’d have to be saccharine polite, constantly
choosing your words super carefully, walking on eggshells.
That sucked worse!
I just stopped using the stuff because I didn’t like who I was
becoming. You know the adage that you should choose a partner on
the basis of who you become when you’re around the person?
That’s a good way to choose technologies, too.
When some friends started a pioneering online community called
the Well in the 1990s, they gave me an account, but I never posted a

single thing. Same story much later, when I helped some buddies
start an online world called Second Life.
In the early 2000s, an enterprising woman named Arianna
Huffington got me to blog on her Huffington Post for a while. I have
to tell you how she did it.
We were at a fancy conference for rich and influential people at a
fancy little town in the Colorado Rockies. I was sitting on a bench
with my arm resting on the rim of a rounded cement wall surrounding
a garbage can. Arianna came along and sat on my arm, trapping it.
“Arianna—oh, you didn’t notice; let me get my arm out.”
In her thick Greek accent: “Do you know what some men would
pay for this privilege? I will release your hand if you will blog for me.”
So I did it. Briefly I was one of the HuffPost’s top bloggers, always
on the front page. But I found myself falling into that old problem
again whenever I read the comments, and I could not get myself to
ignore them. I would feel this weird low-level boiling rage inside me.
Or I’d feel this absurd glow when people liked what I wrote, even if
what they said didn’t indicate that they had paid much attention to it.
Comment authors were mostly seeking attention for themselves.
We were all in the same stew, manipulating each other, inflating
ourselves.
After a short while, I noticed that I’d write things I didn’t even
believe in order to get a rise out of readers. I wrote stuff that I knew
people wanted to hear, or the opposite, because I knew it would be
inflammatory.
Oh my God! I was back in that same place, becoming an asshole
because of something about this stupid technology!
I quit—again.
Of all the ten arguments in this book, this is the one that really
gets to me viscerally. I don’t want to be an asshole. Or a fake-nice
person.
I want to be authentically nice, and certain online designs seem to
fight against that with magical force. That’s the core reason why I
don’t have accounts on Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp,2 Instagram,
Snapchat, or any of the rest. You’ll see fake accounts in my name.

There’s even a supposed @RealJaronLanier on Twitter. But I have
no idea who that is. Not me.
I don’t think I’m better than you because I don’t have social media
accounts. Maybe I’m worse; maybe you can handle the stuff better
than I can.
But I’ve observed that since social media took off, assholes are
having more of a say in the world.
BUMMER platform experiences ricochet between two extremes.
Either there’s a total shitstorm of assholes (that’s not a mixed
metaphor, right?) or everyone is super careful and artificially nice.
The biggest assholes get the most attention, however, and they
often end up giving a platform its flavor. Even if there are corners of
the platform where not everyone is an asshole all the time, those
corners feel penned in, because the assholes are waiting just
outside. It’s part of how BUMMER Component A pushes tribalism.
THE MYSTERIOUS NATURE OF ASSHOLE AMPLIFICATION
TECHNOLOGY

No one has convinced me that they have a complete understanding
of why Component A brings out one’s inner asshole. There are many
theories,3 but here are the ideas that have served me best.
It’s not helpful to think of the world as being divided into assholes
and non-assholes, or if you prefer, trolls and victims.
Each of us has an inner troll. In the early days, before everyone
was doing it, the air was clearer and it was easier to notice how
bizarre it is when your inner troll starts talking. It’s like an ugly alien
living inside you that you long ago forgot about. Don’t let your inner
troll take control! If it happens when you’re in a particular situation,
avoid that situation! It doesn’t matter if it’s an online platform, a
relationship, or a job. Your character is like your health, more
valuable than anything you can buy. Don’t throw it away.
But why, why is the inner troll there at all?
It’s such a common problem that it must be a deep, primal
business, a tragedy of our inheritance, a stupid flaw at the heart of

the human condition. But saying that doesn’t get us anywhere. What
exactly is the inner troll?
Sometimes the inner troll takes charge, sometimes it doesn’t. My
working hypothesis has long been that there’s a switch deep in every
human personality that can be set in one of two modes. We’re like
wolves. We can either be solitary or members of a pack of wolves. I
call this switch the Solitary/Pack switch.
When we’re solitary wolves, we’re more free. We’re cautious, but
also capable of more joy. We think for ourselves, improvise, create.
We scavenge, hunt, hide. We howl once in a while out of pure
exuberance.
When we’re in a pack, interactions with others become the most
important thing in the world. I don’t know how far that goes with
wolves, but it’s dramatic in people. When people are locked in a
competitive, hierarchical power structure, as in a corporation, they
can lose sight of the reality of what they’re doing because the
immediate power struggle looms larger than reality itself.
The example that looms largest today is climate change
denialism. In the scientific community and among virtually all nations
in the world, there’s a consensus that we must confront it, and yet a
small but powerful group of businesspeople and politicians don’t buy
it. They perceive the science of climate change as a plot to attack
their wealth and power. That’s an absurd notion, an absurdity that’s
only possible when you’re locked into understanding the world solely
in terms of human power struggles, to the exclusion of the larger
reality.
For a creature of the technical world, it’s comforting to highlight an
example like that, because it lets us off the hook, but scientific
communities can also suffer from the switch being set to Pack. For
instance, the theoretical physicist Lee Smolin documented how
string theorists exerted mob rule for a while in the world of theoretical
physics.4 The pattern is found whenever people form into groups.
Street gangs perceive only pack concepts such as territory and
revenge, even as they destroy their lives, families, and
neighborhoods. The Pack setting of the switch makes you pay so

much attention to your peers and enemies in the world of packs that
you can become blind to what’s happening right in front of your face.
When the Solitary/Pack switch is set to Pack, we become
obsessed with and controlled by a pecking order. We pounce on
those below us, lest we be demoted, and we do our best to flatter
and snipe at those above us at the same time. Our peers flicker
between “ally” and “enemy” so quickly that we cease to perceive
them as individuals. They become archetypes from a comic book.
The only constant basis of friendship is shared antagonism toward
other packs.
Yes, I’m mixing animal metaphors. Sure, I think a modern
“domesticated” cat is more like a solitary wolf than like a wolf in a
pack, though cats are also intensely concerned with hierarchical
social structures. Maybe cats have a Pride switch, and living with
people gave them the freedom to deemphasize prides. The richer
the hunting ground, the easier it is to not be an asshole toward your
peers. Moving in with people might have been for cats what
advancing technology has been for people. More options means
more chances to not be a troll. At least that’s what advancing
technology has usually meant in the big picture of human history.
BUMMER is an unfortunate exception, a way of using technology to
reduce human freedom.
The switch in people should generally be kept in the Solitary Wolf
position.
When people are solitary wolves, then each individual has access
to slightly different information about the world, and slightly different
ways of thinking about that information. I’ve been talking about the
relationship between the Solitary setting and personal character, but
there are other reasons to keep the switch in the Solitary position.
Consider a demonstration that is often enacted on the first day of
business school. A professor shows a class a big jar of jelly beans
and asks each person to estimate the number of beans. Averaging
all the estimates usually results in a pretty accurate count. Each
person brings different perspectives, cognitive styles, skills, and
strategies to the mystery, and the average gets at the agreements
between them. (This only works for single-number answers. If you

ask a committee to design a product or write a novel, the result
comes out like something made by a committee.)
Now suppose that the students could look at the jar only through
photos in a social media feed. Different camps of people with
different ideas about the number of beans would form and would
ridicule each other. Russian intelligence services would add pictures
of similar jars with different numbers of beans. Bean promoters
would motivate trolls to argue that there aren’t enough beans and
you must buy more. And so on. There would no longer be a way to
guess the number of beans because the power of diversity will have
been compromised. When that happens, markets can no longer offer
utility to the world.
You can replace the jar with a political candidate, a product, or
anything else. But that brings up problems that I’ll tackle in the
arguments about how BUMMER ruins our access to truth and
meaning.
For now, think of the jar in this example as being like your identity,
as it is presented through social media. Your identity is Packified by
BUMMER. By putting yourself out there, you are erasing yourself. As
long as people are thinking for themselves, then collectively they’ll
guess the number of jelly beans in the jar, but that won’t work if
they’re in a pack and stuck in groupthink.
There are situations that call for the switch to be set to Pack.
Military units are the canonical example. Sometimes people must
lose themselves to a hierarchical order because that’s the only way
to survive. But a primary goal of civilization should be to make those
times as rare as possible.
Capitalism fails when the switch is set to Pack. The Pack setting
causes market bubbles and other market failures. There are certainly
noisy businesspeople who prefer military metaphors for business;
you’re supposed to be tough and ruthless. But since the Pack setting
also makes you partially blind, in the long run that personality style is
not great for business, if we define business as being about reality
beyond social competitions.
When people act as solitary wolves, then each person is in a
unique position in society and thinks in a unique way. Another

example: Democratic elections are a genuine commingling of ideas,
and have historically helped societies find paths forward despite
controversy, but only so long as people are switched to Solitary.
Democracy fails when the switch is set to Pack. Tribal voting,
personality cults, and authoritarianism are the politics of the Pack
setting.
It might sound like a contradiction at first, but it isn’t; collective
processes make the best sense when participants are acting as
individuals.
THE MOST MASTERFUL MASTER SWITCH5

Suppose you believe the theory of the Solitary/Pack switch. What is
it about online experiences that turns the switch to the Pack setting?
The simplest answer is probably the right one. The switch will turn to
the Pack setting when the benefits of the Solitary Wolf setting are
made obscure.
When you are a solitary wolf, you are forced to get directly in
touch with the larger reality that doesn’t care about what a society
thinks. You must find water and shelter, or you will perish. You have
to scavenge and hunt for yourself. Your personality shifts; you must
solve problems on the basis of evidence you gather on your own,
instead of by paying attention to group perception. You take on the
qualities of a scientist or an artist.
When you’re in a pack, social status and intrigues become more
immediate than the larger reality. You become more like an operator,
a politician, or a slave.
Therefore, situations in which you are separated from immediate
contact with larger reality, in which social interactions become
preeminent, will turn your inner switch to Pack.
Aside from ringing true, this theory matches available evidence.
For instance, of the large social networks, the one with the fewest
assholes is LinkedIn.6 That doesn’t mean that LinkedIn doesn’t have
other BUMMER problems. Tristan Harris singles it out for criticism
related to exploiting social anxieties in the name of engagement, for
example.7

Full disclosure: I have a professional connection to LinkedIn that
might impair my objectivity (even though I don’t have an account on
the site). You should not accept what I say without thinking about it
critically, and my disclosure of a conflict of interest is a great starting
point to do that. Think for yourself!
Anyway, while the people I know at LinkedIn are lovely, I can also
say that about people I know at Twitter and Facebook. The
difference with LinkedIn is simply that users of LinkedIn have
something to do other than compete for social appearances—
something with meatier stakes. The site is well known as a place to
further your career. It makes money mostly by connecting employers
with hires rather than by manipulating people to make purchases or
change their behavior in other off-topic ways.
Careers are physical, real processes that generate sustenance.
They are not only real but also nonfungible. Each career is both
unique and indispensable to a person. LinkedIn users aren’t all
seeking exactly the same career, so they aren’t forced precisely into
direct conflict or politics with one another. They aren’t each assigned
a popularity number, like social media aspirants who are thrust into a
single global competition.
Users on LinkedIn have something to do other than social posing,
which tends to fuel assholes; and most people will choose to be
something other than an asshole, given the choice. A prevalent layer
of motivation to do anything aside from attention-getting or seeking
other purely psychological rewards is the key. That simple quality,
that there are stakes beyond mind games, elevates an online
environment.
It’s that simple. Practicality—which includes how you make a
living—is ultimately what unites, and therefore civilizes us.8
In BUMMERland, it seems as if every little comment either turns
into a contest for total personal invalidation and destruction, or else
everyone has to get all nicey-nicey and fake. The obvious example is
that the BUMMER-addicted U.S. president, the social media addict–
in—chief, turns everything into a contest over who can destroy

someone else most completely with a tweet, or else who gets good
treatment in exchange for total loyalty.
GO TO WHERE YOU ARE KINDEST

Of course there were assholes in the world before BUMMER, but it
wasn’t as hard to avoid being one. On BUMMER you have to fight
gravity just to be decent.
The online asshole-supremacy problem could be solved rather
easily simply by dumping the BUMMER model of business. One
possibility is that people could earn money more often and more
fairly from what they do online; that idea will be explored in the
argument about how social media is ruining economics.
What we need is anything that’s real beyond social pretensions
that people can focus on instead of becoming assholes.
In the meantime, there is something you can do personally. If,
when you participate in online platforms, you notice a nasty thing
inside yourself, an insecurity, a sense of low self-esteem, a yearning
to lash out, to swat someone down, then leave that platform. Simple.
There is a spotlight on online bullying, as there should be, and
you might have experienced being bullied online. Many, many
people have.
But I am also asking you to notice, within your own mind, in
genuine secrecy—don’t share this—if you are feeling the temptation
to strike out at someone else online. Maybe that other person started
it. Whatever. It isn’t worth it. Leave the platform. Don’t post that insult
video, don’t tweet in retaliation.
If Twitter ceased operations tomorrow, not only would Trump not
be able to tweet, obviously, but also I believe he’d become a nicer,
better person at all hours, at least until he latched on to another
BUMMER platform.
I can’t prove this, and a lot of people will disagree with me. That
doesn’t matter. Look into yourself. Seriously, are you being as kind
as you want to be? At what times are you more like the person you
want to be, and when do you get irritable or dismissive?

Your character is the most precious thing about you. Don’t let it
degrade.

ARGUMENT FOUR

SOCIAL MEDIA IS UNDERMINING TRUTH

EVERYBODY KNOWS

The notion that truth has recently become dead is one of the most
familiar tropes of our times.1 And the murderer most often accused is
social media, or a certain president who is addicted to social media.
Articles with titles like “How Technology Disrupted the Truth”2 are
plentiful enough that I hardly need to pile on.
This book contains varied explanations for how and why social
media undermines truth; the explanations are central to each of the
other nine arguments.
Furthermore, each of components A–F of BUMMER destroys
truth in its own way.
A Assholes change discourse into discharge. They turn the
Solitary/Pack switch to Pack, which makes people pay so much
attention to social status competition that they can become blinded
to everything else, to any broader or more fundamental truth.
B Tech companies spy on you, Butting into your life. The perception
of truth requires that people be authentic, so that they can
perceive authentically. This principle was explained in the analogy
of the jelly beans in the jar. When people are constantly prodded
by spying technologies, they lose authenticity.
C Cramming experiences down your throat. When what people can
be made to perceive is the product sold by some of the richest

corporations, then obviously truth must suffer. The loss of truth is
the product.
D Directing lives through ubiquitous behavior modification. When
engineered addictions are applied to manipulate masses of people
for commercial gain, obviously those masses become removed
from truth. That is precisely the point.
E Earning money by letting some people, often nasty ones, secretly
modify the behaviors of other people. Economic incentives tend to
win over rules, policies, and good intentions, as will be explained
in the Argument to come about economics. Therefore, incentives
in BUMMER often disfavor truth. At best, they aren’t aligned with
truth.
F Fake people have no reason to tell the truth. Indeed, truth is
suicide to a fake person. But fake people have been bred and
amplified by BUMMER.
Truth, meaning a claim that can be tested or events that are
honestly documented—the stuff that all people can hold in common
—is by definition anathema to the manipulations of BUMMER.
BUMMER must often route around truth and attempt to suppress it in
order to thrive.
WHEN PEOPLE ARE FAKE, EVERYTHING BECOMES FAKE

The fake people from Component F are stem cells for all the other
fakeness in BUMMER.
Leaving aside explicitly fake people like Alexa, Cortana, and Siri,
you might think that you’ve never interacted with a fake person
online, but you have, and with loads of them. You decided to buy
something because it had a lot of good reviews, but many of those
reviews were from artificial people. You found a doctor by using a
search engine, but the reason that doctor showed up high in the
search results was that a load of fake people linked to her office. You
looked at a video or read a story because so many other people had,
but most of them were fake. You became aware of tweets because
they were retweeted first by armies of bots.

Our peer groups influence us profoundly when we’re young, but
that remains true throughout life. If your extended peer group
contains a lot of fake people, calculated to manipulate you, you are
likely to be influenced without even realizing it.
This is a difficult truth to accept, but because of the importance of
social perception, it is true to at least a small degree that you have
been living a fake life yourself. BUMMER is making you partially
fake.
Whatever you can do, bots can do a million times while you blink.
Fake people are a cultural denial-of-service attack.
In a denial-of-service attack, hackers get a bot army to bombard a
site with so much traffic that no real person can access it. This is a
typical way that bad actors make use of computer viruses. They
infect millions of computers with a virus and then get those
computers to contact a victim site all at once. Or, more commonly,
they sell that ability as a service.
In the same way, armies of fake people on a BUMMER platform
take up a lot of the oxygen in the room and steer the world on behalf
of their masters.
Fake people are typically not operated by the same people who
operate BUMMER platforms; instead, fake people are manufactured
in a new underworld. There is now an industry that sells counterfeit
humans.
According to reporting by the New York Times, the going rate for
fake people on Twitter in early 2018 was $225 for the first 25,000
fake followers.3 The fake accounts might be mash-ups of accounts
from real people; on casual inspection, they seem real. Celebrities,
businesses, politicians, and a more modern pool of cyber-bad-actor
customers all make use of fake-people factories. The companies that
sell fake people are often fake as well. (The Times found that one
prominent bot service listed a fake address.)
Some sites might not even exist were it not for fake people. The
best-known example might be Ashley Madison, a purported
introduction service for adulterers. The site has reportedly used fake
women to lure men into signing up for more expensive accounts.4 It

has even been accused of creating fake critics to drum up
controversy to promote itself.5
The mainstream BUMMER companies don’t have completely
clean hands when it comes to bots. It is hard for mainstream
BUMMER operators to get rid of fake people entirely, because they
become codependent, in the way that animals need gut bacteria.
Component F provides momentum and free energy. The interlopers
become part of the machine.
The tech companies all do battle with fake accounts, but they also
benefit from them. While people who work at Twitter might, on an
emotional or ethical level, prefer that their platform was bot-free, the
bots also amplify the activity and intensity of the service. Massive
fake social activities turn out to influence real people. They indirectly
create a genuine social reality, which means they make money.
People are successfully manipulated by them. Techies might
rationalize the situation for themselves, coming up with arguments
about how bots increase the diversity of free speech, or some similar
nonsense,6 even though bots can drown out authentic speech.
Another phenomenon that relates to Component F is the way
some legacy media outlets, such as Fox News in the USA, have
become more cranky and partisan. (“Legacy media” means TV,
radio, and print in Silicon Valley–speak.) Why is this happening so
overwhelmingly in the social media era when it was more muted
before, at least in modern times? There are many reasons to
explore, but one reason is surely that BUMMER can be used to craft
a social ambience that makes what was once unthinkable thinkable.
For example, the craziest conspiracy theories often start on
BUMMER, amplified by artificial people, before they appear in hyperpartisan legacy media.7
Hyperpartisan outlets like Fox News can therefore be thought of
as part of Component F. They are chunks of legacy media that have
been jury-rigged to become part of the BUMMER machine.8
Component F makes the BUMMER machine robust in its
awfulness, so that tweaks attempting to improve it do little good. For
instance, in the United States, regulators have asked social media

companies to begin identifying who paid for an ad, but since there
are uncountable multitudes of fake entities energizing the BUMMER
machine, how can anyone know what such an identification will
mean?
Bots route around attempts to tweak or regulate BUMMER. If
BUMMER ads were to become tightly regulated, for instance, bots
might whip up a blizzard of shitposts9 to accomplish what could no
longer be done with ads. This is one of the reasons that BUMMER
must be removed from our world.
In testimony before the U.S. Senate, lawyers for social media
companies stated that they couldn’t detect the fake people.10 They
have no means.
This is dark comedy. The BUMMER algorithms are presumably
trying to manipulate the fake people, just as they manipulate you; but
unlike you, bots are immune.
I must emphasize that the kind of fake person I’m ridiculing is a
mass-produced fraud intended to manipulate. It is absolutely not my
place to judge what is authentic for you or how you construct your
online persona. I’m criticizing a power relationship, not proposing a
theory of authenticity. When a teenager fakes an Instagram account,
that’s not necessarily a bad thing. Becoming literate in the ways of
one’s society is essential if one is to become a first-class citizen in it;
if the society is based on fake people, you’d better learn how to
make a fake person yourself.
BUMMER KILLS

Much of the damage done by BUMMER can be undone by deleting
your accounts, but the social loss of truth spills out from BUMMER
and hurts even people who are not engaged directly with BUMMER
at all. There are many examples of this danger, especially in politics,
but I’ll focus here on public health.
I’m a father, and I want the children my daughter interacts with to
be immunized. Immunization is a common good, a gift we can give
each other. It is one of the greatest inventions in human history.

When I was growing up, there were still plenty of people twisting
their way along on sidewalks, suffering from the deformations of
polio. The victims who still lived and could walk at all were the lucky
ones. It didn’t matter if you were rich or poor, black or white. Anyone
could get polio.
When was the last time you saw a polio victim? And polio is far
from the only example. My parents’ generation lived through
epidemics that killed millions—tens of millions—of people.
Immunizations are better than electricity, flush toilets, and space
exploration all put together. And I really love all those inventions.
But I know other parents—educated, upper-middle-class
American parents—who won’t even consider vaccinating their kids.
Some of them are “left” and some “right.” It’s not just that they think
immunization is bad; they believe that it’s evil, alien, and icky. They
think it causes autism. They can’t get conspiracy theories out of their
heads. You might think I’m being elitist when I am more appalled that
“educated” parents, who are more likely to be affluent, foment
dangerous nonsense, but isn’t the whole point of education
supposed to be that it diminishes people’s susceptibility to
dangerous nonsense?
I have tried to engage with these parents, and that’s when they
show me their BUMMER feeds. Every day they digest memes, fake
scare stories, and clickbait that appear to come11 from bots, though
no one really knows to what degree.12 An ambience of paranoia and
dismissal has overtaken these BUMMER addicts as they seek a new
fix from positive and negative social stimuli every day.
There have always been weird waves of untruth in society, but
somehow, in order to progress into our comfortable modernity, we
gradually found a way to truth, together. What is different in recent
years is that many of us no longer directly interrogate the jar of jelly
beans.
In our BUMMER era, the information reaching people is the result
of how manipulative advertisers and power-mad tech companies
intersect with crazed, engineered status competitions. That means

there’s less authenticity in the social exploration that helps us find
truth.
People are clustered into paranoia peer groups because then
they can be more easily and predictably swayed. The clustering is
automatic, sterile, and, as always, weirdly innocent. There wasn’t
anyone sitting in a tech company who decided to promote antivaccine rhetoric as a tactic. It could just as easily have been antihamster rhetoric. The only reason BUMMER reinforces the stuff is
that paranoia turns out, as a matter of course, to be an efficient way
of corralling attention.
The ability of humans to enjoy our modern luxuries, such as a
diminution of deadly epidemics, while even temporarily rejecting the
benefits of hard-won truths is a testament to how far we’ve come as
a technological species. Some of us can briefly get away with
assuming that people will be healthy without vaccinations, as if
health were the natural state of affairs.
Public health measures and modern medicine have doubled our
life spans. Doubled! The unintended result is that now some of us
can believe nonsense and not pay for that belief with our lives. At
least for a while.
In order to benefit in the long term as technology improves, we
have to find a way to not let our improved comfort and security turn
into cover for a lazy drift into perilous fantasy. Media forms that
promote truth are essential for survival, but the dominant media of
our age do no such thing.
I focused on this example because it upsets me as a parent;
that’s a deep level on which to be upset. It’s maddening to drive
through Silicon Valley and realize that many of my friends working
behind all those green glass windows in the low-slung tech company
buildings that reach to the horizon might be contributing to a process
that’s reviving once-defeated diseases in children.13
Save children; delete your accounts.

ARGUMENT FIVE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING WHAT YOU SAY
MEANINGLESS

What you say isn’t meaningful without context.
It’s easy to miss this simple fact in our day-to-day, face-to-face
lives, because the context is usually obvious. Suppose I say, “Get off
me! I can’t give you more attention now!” Sounds weird or cruel,
unless you see me saying that to our cat Loof (called that because
she isn’t aloof), who makes genuinely unreasonable demands for
attention.
The principle becomes clearer in extreme situations. If you see
someone in a car that has fire coming out from under the hood, and
you yell, “Fire!”, then you might save that person’s life. If you yell the
same thing in a crowded club, you might get people killed in a
stampede, whether or not there really is a fire.
Online, we often have little or no ability to know or influence the
context in which our expression will be understood. The easiest way
to understand the principle is to note extreme examples.
The best documented “extreme” examples are the ones where
those doing the expressing have some clout and are able to force a
change. For instance, consider this problem for YouTube advertisers:
For a while, it wasn’t uncommon for an ad for something innocuous,
like soap, to be streamed in sequence with a horrible terroristrecruitment video. When advertisers complained—and only then,
after the fact—Google started to root out terrorist content.1 Actual

money was paid to affected advertisers in compensation. The
advertisers are the true customers, so they have a voice. Do
ordinary users get to say as much about the context in which they
are placed by BUMMER schemes?
The most common extreme examples, however, might arise when
women and girls who attempt to express themselves online find that
their words and images are sexualized or incorporated into a violent
or manipulative framework. Women’s online presences have often
been grotesquely transformed for the purposes of humiliation,
shame, and harassment.2 Prominent women have faced harassment
for years—for example, the women affected by “Gamergate”—but
now it’s happening to ordinary young women.3
These extreme examples occur only because the rules of the
game in BUMMER are that you don’t know the context in which you
are expressing anything and you have no reliable way of knowing
how it will be presented to someone else.
This problem has become so pervasive that it’s almost invisible,
like air. We have given up our connection to context. Social media
mashes up meaning. Whatever you say will be contextualized and
given meaning by the way algorithms, crowds, and crowds of fake
people who are actually algorithms mash it up with what other
people say.
No one ever knows exactly how what they’re saying will be
received, but in non-BUMMER situations you usually have
reasonable guesses. I speak in public sometimes, and I instinctively
adjust my presentation to an audience. I say different things to high
school students than I do to a room full of quants.4 This is just a
normal part of communication.
Speaking through social media isn’t really speaking at all. Context
is applied to what you say after you say it, for someone else’s
purposes and profit.
This changes what can be expressed. When context is
surrendered to the platform, communication and culture become
petty, shallow, and predictable. You have to become crazy extreme if
you want to say something that will survive even briefly in an

unpredictable context. Only asshole communication can achieve
that.
MEANING AJAR

BUMMER replaces your context with its context. From the point of
view of the algorithms, you are no longer a name, but a number: the
number of followers, likes, clicks, or other measures of how much
you contributed to the BUMMER machine, moment to moment.
Dystopian science fiction often imagines an evil empire that
replaces names with numbers. Real-life prisons do it to prisoners.
There’s a reason. To become a number is to be explicitly subservient
to a system. A number is a public verification of reduced freedom,
status, and personhood. It’s especially chilling to me, because my
mother survived a concentration camp, where your number was
tattooed on your arm. That would be too expensive to do today. The
Nazis would just store your number, along with your biometrics, in
the cloud.
This might all sound a little too dark to people playing the social
media numbers game. I am presented with a thoroughly modern
dilemma. If people want to be subsumed, then who am I to say, “You
should fight for your individual dignity?” Doesn’t that make me the
one who isn’t respecting the wishes of others?
Because of the dilemma I just mentioned, I don’t want to criticize
people who seem to like the situation—for instance, young people
who are trying to be social media influencers. Instead I’ll focus on
people who are trying to do something other than be a number, even
as they are subsumed by the new reality of number supremacy.
Sources of content, such as news websites, are discovered by
people mostly through BUMMER, so such sites must game
themselves to be favored by algorithms and crowds.
One newsroom I visited recently had big screens up all over the
place, similar to a NASA control room, but showing up-to-the-second
statistics about each post created by someone in the room.
Presumably the writers and other creators are supposed to be glued
to these numbers in order to maximize “engagement.” They are

forced to become components of the BUMMER machine. I feel sorry
for them.
This problem has lately been associated with the Facebook feed,
but it is a BUMMER-wide failure. It was already a problem before the
Facebook feed existed.5 Now that Facebook has announced it will
deemphasize news in its feed, maybe things will get a little better;
nonetheless, it’s hard to imagine that news will now be instantly free
of BUMMER-driven context collapse. In order for the news to regain
context, people will have to discover news through non-BUMMER
systems. What will these systems be? Hopefully people will develop
direct relationships, even more hopefully with subscriptions, to
sources of news and other content.
In the meantime, there are many problems with the subsuming of
journalism to the god of statistics. Some of the criticisms are familiar:
too much clickbait lowers the level of public discourse; writers aren’t
given the space to take risks.
Remember how BUMMER algorithms are constantly selfoptimizing? Except that they fall into ruts? The process was
described back in the first argument. Everyone, including journalists,
is forced to play the optimization game in hopes of getting the most
out of BUMMER. A news source will keep tweaking what it does until
further tweaks no longer yield better results. After that, repetition.
That’s why so much clickbait is so similar. There’s only this one weird
trick to optimize clickbait.6
It’s not the tweaking but the BUMMER environment that gets
people stuck. Out in the real world, outside of BUMMER, there is
enough complexity and subtlety that tweaking doesn’t drive everyone
to the same stuck place. Feedback is a good thing, but
overemphasizing immediate feedback within an artificially limited
online environment leads to ridiculous outcomes.7
Here’s a non-geeky framing of the same idea: What if listening to
an inner voice or heeding a passion for ethics or beauty were to lead
to more important work in the long term, even if it measured as less
successful in the moment? What if deeply reaching a small number
of people matters more than reaching everybody with nothing?

Some other questions need to be asked. First, why believe the
numbers? As discussed in the previous argument, much of the
online world is fake. Fake readers, fake commenters, fake referrals. I
note that news sites that are trying to woo advertisers directly often
seem to show spectacularly greater numbers of readers for articles
about products that might be advertised—like choosing your next
gaming machine—than for articles about other topics.
This doesn’t mean the site is fudging its numbers. Instead, a
manager probably hired a consulting firm that used an algorithm to
optimize the choice of metrics services to relate the kind of usage
statistics the site could use to attract advertisers. In other words, the
site’s owners didn’t consciously fudge, but they kinda-sorta know
that their stats are part of a giant fudge cake.
Don’t blame the site. There are so few independent news sites,
and they’re precious. They’ve been backed into a corner by
BUMMER and they’re incredibly vulnerable. News organizations—
especially those supporting expensive investigative journalism—
have been told for twenty years that it’s up to them to be nimble
enough to come up with new business plans that will stand up to the
“disruptions” of the big tech companies, but no one has ever come
up with actual good advice.
So the news has thinned, even as the news is ever more in the
news. There is constant BUMMER obsession with the news, and yet
there are almost no investigative local news organizations left in the
United States. Our huge nation is only a few organizations away
from having no independent newsrooms with resources and clout.
When writers become less motivated by the desire to reach
people directly, but instead must appeal to a not necessarily reliable
number-dispensing system, then writers are losing their connection
to their context. The more successful a writer is in this system, the
less she knows what she’s writing.
Even when the readers are real, not fake, algorithms are routing
them to particular content, so their choices aren’t really independent.
The measurements aren’t valid, by definition. You can’t tell someone
where to go and then claim that you discovered something new

because you learned where that person went. This is yet another
ubiquitous problem that’s as hard to see as air.
Here’s some positive spin: The fact that independent journalism is
in trouble in BUMMER’s shadow is a sign of its integrity. Journalists
have successfully held themselves to higher standards than social
media influencers, but they have also paid a price. Now the real
news is called “fake news,” because by the standards of BUMMER,
what is real is fake; in BUMMER, reality has been replaced by stupid
numbers.
POD PEOPLE

Another way to illuminate the tricky degradation of context is to
notice online situations in which it is not a problem, at least not yet. A
part of the online world that hasn’t destroyed its own context—at
least as I write, in 2018—is podcasting. It isn’t BUMMER yet.
Podcasters are real people, known to the listener. Podcasts are
episodic, so they build a sense of personality and context. The
listener can’t—as yet—jump around audio content as easily as she
or he can jump around content that’s presented visually, like a
website or a video. So a listener’s actual experience is more like the
experience the podcaster imagines it will be than like what happens
when someone uses a BUMMER feed.
To make the distinction clearer, I’ll invent a way to ruin
podcasting. Nobody do this, okay?
Some crummy person could make an app that transcribes all the
podcasts available in a store and synthesizes a new “artificially
intelligent” podcast that combines snippets from lots of different
podcasts that—as one example—contain the same set of keywords.
You could say, “I want to hear opinions about x political candidate,”
or maybe about some celebrity.
Then you’d hear a rapid-fire sequence of people saying things
about the subject. You would not hear what had come just before
each snippet or what comes next. The snippets would go by so fast,
and there’d be so many of them, that even if a computer voice

identified where each snippet was snipped from, you wouldn’t be
able to take it in.
Podcasters would strive to come up with snippets catchy enough
to be snagged and rolled into the sausage. There would be a lot of
goofy cursing, ambushes, freaky screams and laughs, none of which
meant much.
AI researchers would proudly show how one podcaster’s voice
can be made to speak what another podcaster has said. You could
get all your podcasts read by the actor of your choice. What Ezra
Klein says, intoned by Gilbert Gottfried.
Plus, personal voicemail messages would be inserted into the
queue, just to up your engagement; maybe that would be the only
way to even hear your own messages.
Oh, and there would be ads mixed in. Your spouse’s voice talking
about that new internet-of-things sensor clothing that reports your
posture to unknown targeted advertising services. In the middle of a
mush of fragments of politics podcasts, a voice would talk about how
a politician is running a child sex ring in the basement of a pizza
parlor.
Armies of trolls and fake trolls would game the system and add
enough cruel podcast snippets to the mix that your digest would
become indigestible. Even the sweetest snippets would become
mere garnishes on a cruel, paranoid, enraging, and crazy-making
sonic soup.
Or, maybe your aggregated podcast will be a filter bubble. It will
include only voices you agree with—except they won’t really be
voices, because the content will all be mushed together into a
stream of fragments, a caricature of what listeners supposedly hold
in common. You wouldn’t even live in the same universe as someone
listening to a different aggregation.
The podcast aggregator app might be called something AIarrogant, like Podcast Meta-genius, or maybe something toddlercute, like Poddytraining.
If this scenario sounds preposterous and bizarre, look at what has
happened to text, image, and video already. How is Poddytraining

different or worse than what people who rely on social media feeds
to connect to the world already accept?
Podcasts still rely on stores and subscriptions, so they maintain a
person-to-person
structure
instead
of
a
person-tocrowd/algorithm/hidden-manipulator structure.
Enjoy podcasts while you can. Please stay alert, and if podcasts
are ruined, stop making them and stop listening. For now, remember
that you have only the most tenuous connection to the meaning of
the stuff you add to the BUMMER monster.

ARGUMENT SIX

SOCIAL MEDIA IS DESTROYING YOUR
CAPACITY FOR EMPATHY

This argument is the flip side of the argument about how social
media makes you meaningless. Other people are also becoming
meaningless; you understand less about what’s going on with them.
Recall that Component C of BUMMER—Cramming experiences
into your life—means that algorithms determine what you see. That
means you don’t know what other people are seeing, because
Component C is calculating different results for them. You can’t know
how much the worldviews of other people are being biased and
shaped by BUMMER. Personalized search, feeds, streams, and so
on are at the root of this problem.
Suppose an old-time behaviorist placed a row of caged dogs in a
lab, each dog getting treats or electric shocks, depending on what
that dog just did. The experiment would work only if each dog got
stimuli tied to that dog’s specific behavior. If the wires were crossed,
so that dogs were getting each other’s stimuli, then the experiment
would cease to function.
The same thing is true of people in a BUMMER platform. The
implications for people are even more profound than for dogs,
however, because the people aren’t in separate cages, and therefore
rely crucially on social perception.
This means that we notice one another’s reactions in order to
help us each get our own bearings. If everyone around you is

nervous about something, you will get nervous, too, because
something must be going on. When everyone is relaxed, you’ll tend
to relax.
When I was a kid, a common prank was to go to a place where
there were other people and simply start looking up at the sky. Soon
everyone was looking up at the sky, even though there was nothing
there.
A wonderful way to notice social perception is to travel to a
country where you don’t speak the language. You’ll find that you are
suddenly very attuned to what other people are doing and what they
are paying attention to, because that’s the only way to know what’s
going on. One time I noticed people in a jungle in Thailand paying
attention to a certain direction, so I did too, just in time to get out of
the way of speeding army jeeps that came out of nowhere. Social
perception saved my life. It has always been part of how humanity
has survived.
But when we’re all seeing different, private worlds, then our cues
to one another become meaningless. Our perception of actual
reality, beyond the BUMMER platform, suffers.
There are many recent examples, such as the time a person fired
a shot in a pizza parlor because of a frenzied online belief that a
child sex ring was being run out of the basement.1 There were false
beliefs spread by social craziness before BUMMER, such as those
that inspired the Salem witch hunts, but acute outbreaks were rarer
than they are today. The speed, idiocy, and scale of false social
perceptions have been amplified to the point that people often don’t
seem to be living in the same world, the real world, anymore.
This is another one of those obvious problems that sneaked up
on us. Public space lost dimension, but also commonality in general
has been desiccated.
A thought experiment can help expose how weird our situation
has become. Can you imagine if Wikipedia showed different versions
of entries to each person on the basis of a secret data profile of that
person? Pro-Trump visitors would see an article completely different

from the one shown to anti-Trump people, but there would be no
accounting of all that was different or why.
This might sound dystopian or bizarre, but it’s similar to what you
see in your BUMMER feed. Content is chosen and ads are
customized to you, and you don’t know how much has been
changed for you, or why.
Another way to see the problem is to think about public spaces. If
you share a space with people who aren’t looking at their
smartphones, you are all in that space together. You have a common
base of experience. It can be an amazing feeling, and it’s a big
reason why people go to clubs, sports events, and houses of
worship.
But when everyone is on their phone, you have less of a feeling
for what’s going on with them. Their experiences are curated by
faraway algorithms. You and they can’t build unmolested
commonality unless the phones are put away.
Traces of the old sharable world remain. You can watch the oldfashioned TV news that people like you watch, or that people who
aren’t like you watch. I don’t like Fox News in the United States, for
instance, because I think it’s too paranoid, partisan, and cranky. But I
watch it sometimes, and it helps me understand what other people
who watch it are thinking and feeling. I cherish that ability.
I have no way of seeing your social media feed, however. I
therefore have lessened powers to empathize with what you think
and feel. We don’t need to all see the same thing to understand each
other. Only old-fashioned authoritarian regimes try to make everyone
see the same thing. But we do need to be able to peek at what other
people see.
Empathy2 is the fuel that runs a decent society. Without it, only
dry rules and competitions for power are left.
I might have been responsible for bringing the term “empathy”
into high-tech marketing, because I started talking about VR as a
tool for empathy back in the 1980s. I still believe that it’s possible for
tech to serve the cause of empathy. If a better future society involves
better tech at all, empathy will be involved.

But BUMMER is precisely tuned to ruin the capacity for empathy.
DIGITALLY IMPOSED SOCIAL NUMBNESS

A common and correct criticism of BUMMER is that it creates “filter
bubbles.”3 Your own views are soothingly reinforced, except when
you are presented with the most irritating versions of opposing
views, as calculated by algorithms. Soothe or savage: whatever best
keeps your attention.
You are drawn into a corral with other people who can be
maximally engaged along with you as a group. BUMMER algorithms
intrinsically gravitate toward corralling people into bubbles, because
to engage a group is more effective and economical than to up
engagement one person at a time.
(But, to review, the term should be “manipulate,” not “engage,”
since it’s done in the service of unknown third parties who pay
BUMMER companies to change your behavior. Otherwise, what are
they paying for? What else could Facebook say it’s being paid tens
of billions of dollars to do?)
On the face of it, filter bubbles are bad, because you see the
world in tunnel vision. But are they really new? Surely there were
damaging and annoying forms of exclusionary social communication
that predate BUMMER, including the use of racist “dog whistles” in
politics.
For example, in the 1988 American presidential election,
politicians famously used the story of a black man named Willie
Horton who had committed crimes after a prison furlough in order to
evoke latent racism in the electorate. But in that case, everyone saw
the same ad, so that you could at least get a sense of why someone
else might have responded to it in a racist way, even if you strongly
disagreed.
But now you don’t always get to see those racist ads. This is
sometimes because of so-called dark ads, which show up in a
person’s newsfeed even though they aren’t technically published as
news.4 Many extremist political dark ads on Facebook only came to
light as a result of forensic investigations of what happened in the

2016 elections.5 They were blatant and poisonous, and Facebook
has announced plans to reduce their harm, though that policy is in
flux as I write.
While no one outside Facebook—or maybe even inside Facebook
—knows how common or effective dark ads and similar messages
have been,6 the most common form of online myopia is that most
people can only make time to see what’s placed in front of them by
algorithmic feeds.
I fear the subtle algorithmic tuning of feeds more than I fear
blatant dark ads. It used to be impossible to send customized
messages to millions of people instantly. It used to be impossible to
test and design multitudes of customized messages, based on
detailed observation and feedback from unknowing people who are
kept under constant surveillance.
It might turn out that a certain font around someone’s portrait on a
certain day makes a small percentage of people trust that person
just a little less. Maybe the same font showed up in a popular video
about an unpleasant topic that same day. No one will ever know why
the font has the effect it does, though. It’s all statistical.
The results are tiny changes in the behavior of people over time.
But small changes add up, like compound interest.
This is one reason that BUMMER naturally promotes tribalism
and is tearing society apart, even if the techies in a BUMMER
company are well meaning. In order for BUMMER code to selfoptimize, it naturally and automatically seizes upon any latent
tribalism and racism, for these are the neural hashtags waiting out
there in everyone’s psyche, which can be accentuated for the
purpose of attention monopoly. (I’ll address this problem in more
detail in the argument about how social media makes social
improvement hopeless.)
Not only is your worldview distorted, but you have less awareness
of other people’s worldviews. You are banished from the experiences
of the other groups being manipulated separately. Their experiences
are as opaque to you as the algorithms that are driving your
experiences.

This is an epochal development. The version of the world you are
seeing is invisible to the people who misunderstand you, and vice
versa.
THE LOST THEORY IN YOUR BRAIN

The ability to theorize about what someone else experiences as part
of understanding that person is called having a theory of mind. To
have a theory of mind is to build a story in your head about what’s
going on in someone else’s head. Theory of mind is at the core of
any sense of respect or empathy, and it’s a prerequisite to any hope
of intelligent cooperation, civility, or helpful politics. It’s why stories
exist.
You’ve heard expressions like “Don’t judge someone until you’ve
walked a mile in their shoes.” You can’t understand people without
knowing a little of what they’ve gone through.
Most animals get by without theory of mind, but people need it.
When you can only see how someone else behaves, but not the
experiences that influenced their behavior, it becomes harder to
have a theory of mind about that person. If you see someone hit
someone else, for instance, but you did not see that they did it in
defense of a child, you might misinterpret what you see.
In the same way, if you don’t see the dark ads, the ambient
whispers, the cold-hearted memes, and the ridicule-filled customized
feed that someone else sees, that person will just seem crazy to you.
And that is our new BUMMER world. We seem crazy to each
other, because BUMMER is robbing us of our theories of one
another’s minds.
Even when other people’s experiences are candidly caught on
camera, perhaps by a smartphone or a dashcam, BUMMER
motivates enough noise to destroy commonality. BUMMER-driven
opacity plays out online all the time. A video shows the moments
before a police shooting, for instance, but BUMMER makes people
upload endless versions of the video with different edits, overlays,
and obfuscations. Empathy is lost to noise.

Trump supporters seem nuts to me, and they say liberals seem
nuts to them. But it’s wrong to say we’ve grown apart and can’t
understand each other. What’s really going on is that we see less
than ever before of what others are seeing, so we have less
opportunity to understand each other.
Sure, you can monitor at least some of the typical content that
other people are probably seeing. I keep up with conservative news
sites, for instance. I always seek out personal contact with people
who disagree with me if they’re willing to give it a go.7 There’s even a
nice community on Reddit devoted to this quest,8 but it’s drowned
out by an ocean of chaotic poison.
The degree of difference between what is shown to someone else
and what I can guess is being shown is itself unknowable. The
opacity of our times is even worse than it might be because the
degree of opacity is itself opaque. I remember when the internet was
supposed to bring about a transparent society. The reverse has
happened.

ARGUMENT SEVEN

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU UNHAPPY

WHY DO SO MANY FAMOUS TWEETS END WITH THE WORD
“SAD”?

The cheerful rhetoric from the BUMMER companies is all about
friends and making the world more connected. And yet science
reveals1 the2 truth.3 Research4 shows a world that is not more
connected,5 but instead suffers from a heightened sense of
isolation.6
The pattern7 has become so clear8 that even research published
by social media companies shows how they make you sad.
Facebook researchers have practically bragged9 that they could
make people unhappy without the people realizing why.10
Why promote something like that as a great research result?
Wouldn’t it be damaging to Facebook’s brand image? The reason
might have been that it was great publicity for reaching the true
customers, those who pay to manipulate. The ones who are
manipulated, meaning you, are the product, not the customer.
More recently, Facebook researchers finally acknowledged11 what
other researchers have found: that their products can do real harm.
What really bugs me about the way social media companies talk
about this problem is that they’ll say, “Sure we make you sad, but we
do more good in the world than harm.” But then the good things they
brag about are all things that are intrinsic to the internet, that could—
so far as we know—be had without the bad stuff, without BUMMER.

Yes, of course it’s great that people can be connected,12 but why
must they accept manipulation by a third party as the price of that
connection? What if the manipulation, not the connection, is the real
problem?13
At the start of this chapter I shared a few references about how
social media makes you sad, even when connecting with people on
the internet might otherwise make you happy, but the quantity of
data is overwhelming. Just do a search. (Be aware that when you do
that, it might have an impact on your feeds; you might be tagged—
not necessarily explicitly, but implicitly, by association—as a
potentially depressible person. Online manipulators might use
algorithms that automatically try to take advantage of that, and it
might make you depressed.)
Read the papers in the footnotes to dig into research that
supports the thesis that social media makes you sad. You’ll also find
a variety of hypotheses about why it is so: the setting of
unreasonable standards for beauty or social status, for instance, or
vulnerability to trolls.
Why the variety? Wouldn’t one way of bumming people out be
enough? Since the core strategy of the BUMMER business model is
to let the system adapt automatically to engage you as much as
possible, and since negative emotions can be utilized more readily,
of course such a system is going to tend to find a way to make you
feel bad. It will dole out sparse charms14 in between the doldrums as
well, since the autopilot that tugs at your emotions will discover that
the contrast between treats and punishment is more effective than
either treats or punishment alone. Addiction is associated with
anhedonia, the lessened ability to take pleasure from life apart from
whatever one is addicted to, and social media addicts appear to be
prone to long-term anhedonia.15
Of course BUMMER will make you unhappy. But how? The
particular form of unhappiness will be tailored to you, as a matter of
course. The people who run the BUMMER companies need never
find out what brought you down. That is for you to know, your last
privacy. You might become anxious that you’re not as attractive or

successful as other people you are exposed to, even as you’re
harnessed by the system to make someone out there feel the same
way.
Based on the research, there are trends in the forms that
unhappiness takes, so I could guess about what’s going on with you.
You might have less sex than you seek in proportion to the amount
of time you use apps to seek sex.16 You’re sitting there swiping at a
screen. You might spend less time with your family in proportion to
the cuteness of the presentation of your family life you put out there
on social media.17 You might be at risk for self-harm in proportion to
your social media use, especially if you’re a young woman.18 You
might be making traumatic experiences worse by using social
media.19 You might be losing self-esteem even as you express
yourself.20
I could guess, but that’s not the approach I’m going to take here. I
don’t know you. Research only reveals statistical tendencies. You
might be the exception. It’s not my job to make guesses about what’s
right for you.
THE WRONG END OF THE BUMMER

What I will do is dig into why I’ve found that certain online designs,
including most social media, make me unhappy. My discontent is
related to all the arguments that have come before, because
BUMMER places me in a subordinate position. It’s structurally
humiliating.
What bums me out is not some particular surface pattern—like
seeing everyone else misrepresent their lives as being more wealthy,
happy, and trouble-free than they are—but instead it’s the core
BUMMER system. Being addicted and manipulated makes me feel
bad, but there’s more to it than that. BUMMER makes me feel
judged within an unfair and degrading competition, and to no higher
purpose.
I started to notice the bad feelings from the earliest prototypes of
social media, which go way back to the 1980s. Even with ancient
services like early Usenet, I found that there was a strange,

unfamiliar hollow in me after a session. It was something I had not
felt since I was a child. An insecurity, a feeling of not making the
grade, a fear of rejection, out of nowhere.
I thought I must be at fault, because here was a more advanced
technology, and surely that meant it was better than primitive analog
media like telephones and newspapers.
This feeling was coincident with discovering my inner troll, which I
described in the argument about assholes, but it could also be felt
distinctly. I took an experimental approach to myself. If I felt bad after
using an internet design, what were its qualities? How was it different
from designs that left me happy? Here is one thing I discovered
about myself: I don’t mind being judged if the judges put in real
effort, and a higher purpose is being honestly served, but I really
don’t like it when a crowd judges me casually, or when a stupid
algorithm has power over me.
I don’t like it when a program counts whether I have more or
fewer friends than other people, whether people like me, or if I am in
some way better, cooler, more likely to get rich, or whatever.
BUMMER algorithms must put you into categories and rank you in
order to do anything BUMMER at all. The whole purpose of
BUMMER is turning you and changes to your behavior into a
product. The algorithms fundamentally work to favor platform owners
and advertisers, and those parties need abstractions of you in order
to manipulate you.
The BUMMER algorithms behind companies like Facebook and
Google are stored in some of the few files in the world that can’t be
hacked; they’re kept that secret. The deepest secrets of the NSA21
and the CIA22 have leaked, repeatedly, but you can’t find a copy of
Google’s search algorithm or Facebook’s feed algorithm on the dark
web.23
Part of the reason is that if everyone could see how present-day
artificial intelligence and other revered cloud programs really worked,
they would be alarmed. They’d realize how arbitrary the results can
sometimes be. (This randomness was explored in the first
argument.) The algorithms are only fractionally, statistically useful,

and yet that thinnest thread of utility has built the greatest fortunes of
our time.
But to me it’s not even about the programs, however overworshipped they might be, but about the power relationships that
arise because people accept and implicitly respect the programs.
There have always been overblown—outright ridiculous—sources
of information and opinions about you, but they didn’t use to matter
much. An example was old-fashioned horoscopes in newspapers.
There wasn’t any way for a company to track your clicks or your eye
gaze, so no one knew what you read. If you read your horoscope
(which—I’m sorry if you’re a believer—seems ridiculous to me) then
so what?
Maybe you really believed in astrology, maybe you thought it was
interesting to have random things said about you, or maybe you
thought the whole thing was just a joke, but fun. Whatever. It was
between you and an inanimate object, and maybe an occasional
person you’d tell.
The horoscope in the newspaper didn’t do anything outside of
your own head; it did nothing that affected the power relationships
between you and other people.
Things are different in the age of BUMMER. Let’s say that instead
of a paper newspaper, it’s an online service, and let’s say that
instead of horoscopes, the judgments about you concern your
health, your work ethic, your dating desirability, or something else.
Facebook, for instance, puts you into categories based on your
political leaning and many other factors.24 These categories are
BUMMER’s answer to horoscopes.
The judgments of the BUMMER algorithms that classify you might
not be meaningful or reliable in a scientific sense, but they really do
matter in real life. They play into what news you see, whom you’re
introduced to as a potential date, what products you are offered.
Judgments based on social media might determine what loans you
can get,25 which countries you can visit,26 whether you get a job,27
what education you can receive,28 the outcome of your auto
insurance claim,29 and your freedom to congregate with others.30 (In

many of these examples, third parties are applying their own judging
algorithms to BUMMER data instead of relying on the categories
created by BUMMER companies directly.)
Your whims and quirks are under the microscope of powers
greater than you for the first time, unless you used to live in a police
state like East Germany or North Korea.
The inability to carve out a space in which to invent oneself
without constant judgment; that is what makes me unhappy. How
can you have self-esteem when that’s not the kind of esteem that
matters most anymore?
How can you find happiness without authentic self-esteem? How
can you be authentic when everything you read, say, or do is being
fed into a judgment machine?
To be clear, there are two levels of judgments going in the
BUMMER machine. One kind can be understood by humans, and
might be seen by humans. The internet is filled with opinions about
you, you personally, right now. How many friends, followers? Are you
hot? How many points have you earned? Did you get a virtual gold
star or maybe some virtual confetti from a store because you
convinced others to use the same store?
The other level of judgment is based on mathematical correlations
that people might not ever see or be able to interpret. These are
sometimes called intermediate-layer interpretations because of how
they are generated within machine learning algorithms. They are
used to optimize BUMMER sneakiness: What ads are most likely to
have a certain effect on you, what news, what cute cat pictures
mixed into the feed of news you are getting from family members?
Whatever the details, notice what’s happening. Suddenly you and
other people are being put into a lot of stupid competitions no one
asked for. Why aren’t you sent as many cool pictures as your friend?
Why aren’t you followed as much? This constant dosing of social
anxiety only gets people more glued in. Deep mechanisms in the
social parts of our brains monitor our social standing, making us
terrified to be left behind, like a runt sacrificed to predators on the
savannah.

I realized a long time ago that I don’t want to be ranked unless it’s
for something specific that I chose. If I want to get funding for a
research project, I know I have to compete for it, and I know my
project will be ranked. But how dare some crappy algorithm
broadcast an unsought ranking of me?
But as ridiculous as it is, when it happens, I find I can’t just put it
out of my mind. There’s some little demon in me that’s competitive.
Most of us probably have this creature inside us.
I see that so-and-so was just judged to be more
popular/intelligent/connected/valuable/whatever and that little demon
inside me says, “Oh, yeah?” Then I feel I need to do something
about it: either win at the game or find a different game.
But so long as you remain inside BUMMER, you can never
escape. There are a million BUMMER games going on all the time,
and you’re a loser at almost all of them, because you’re competing
with the whole planet. The winners are mostly random.
It’s as if, instead of one football game being played at a time,
there’s always a global game that takes up the whole earth, with
everyone pitted against everyone and most of us always losing.
Worst sport ever.
Even worse, there are a few people, Silicon Valley people like me,
who are looking down on you, seeing more than you or your friends
can, and manipulating you.
HIGH CASTLE

This truth really hit me one time when Google was new and small. I
was over at their little pre-Googleplex offices and a friend of mine,
one of their first programmers, told me about an email they had
received from a woman who was very upset. Whenever someone
Googled this woman’s name, the first thing they saw was a moronic
post that claimed she was obsessed with urine.
It was an interesting moment for Google’s early crew. Should they
heed the desperate demands of the woman to do something about
her situation, or should they trust that in the bigger picture, the harm
would be outdone by a greater good?

This sort of issue (pun!) is old news today, but unfortunately lives
can still be ruined. Uber, which is pseudo-BUMMER, called the
ability to spy on people the “God View.”31
From the amazing godlike perspective of Silicon Valley, either
people or algorithms can always see who has written what, and
when; who looked it up and read it, and when. We can see the whole
process as if we are looking in on an ant farm. And the little ants
know it. They know they are being watched. The woman wrote
increasingly impassioned pleas for help. Some people in the office
that day felt sorry for her, while some laughed at her.
That sense of being an ant watched by supposedly superior
beings who are actually not superior at all, but just the same old
people from school, just the ones who happened to get BUMMER
jobs … that feeling is degrading and depressing.
And let me remind you that negative emotions are more readily
accessible and more profitable BUMMER magnets for people than
positive ones.
If ordinary people were to get all happy and satisfied, they might
take a moment away from the obsession with social media numbers
and go frolic in the flowers or even pay direct attention to each other.
But if they’re all on edge about whether they’re popular enough,
worried about whether the world is imploding, or furious at morons
who are thrust into the middle of their connections with friends and
families, then they dare not disengage. They are hooked because of
provoked natural vigilance.
We in Silicon Valley like to watch the ants dig harder into their dirt.
They send us money as we watch.
The imbalanced power relationship is in your face all the time.
Don’t you feel humiliated using one of the Facebook brands, like
Instagram or WhatsApp? Facebook is the first public company
controlled by one person.32 I mean, I don’t personally have anything
against Mark Zuckerberg. It isn’t about him. But why would you
subordinate a big part of your life to any one stranger?
When I was growing up there were big politicians, rich people,
pop stars, captains of industry, and all that, but none of them got to

run my life in any substantial way. They influenced me now and then
by saying something that caught my attention, but that was it. They
remained far away from my personal life.
I suspect that even though you might say it doesn’t bother you, on
some level you know it does, and there’s no point in being angry
because you can’t see any way to do anything about it. But there is.
Delete your accounts.33

ARGUMENT EIGHT

SOCIAL MEDIA DOESN’T WANT YOU TO HAVE
ECONOMIC DIGNITY

DOUBLE BUMMER

Since BUMMER showed up, the economic lives of many people in
the developed world have taken on an uncomfortable quality. More
and more people rely on the gig economy, which makes it hard to
plan one’s life. Gig economy workers rarely achieve financial
security, even after years of work. To put it another way, the level of
risk in their financial lives seems to never decline, no matter how
much they’ve achieved. In the United States, where the social safety
net is meager, this means that even skilled, hardworking people may
be made homeless by medical bills, even after years of dedicated
service to their profession.
Meanwhile, a small number of entrepreneurs—who always turn
out to be close to some kind of computation hub—have become
fantastically wealthy, creating an ever-widening gap between rich
and poor, reminiscent of the nineteenth century’s Gilded Age. Risk
has been radiated out to ordinary people; those close to the biggest
computers are locked in to wealth, like casino owners.
Is this unsustainable shift in the economic/social contract related
to BUMMER, or did the two developments just happen to appear at
the same time? The answer is that BUMMER has not only made a
lot of people emotionally insecure; it has also made many folks
financially insecure.

What’s the connection? To explain, I first need to tell you about
digital politics in the years when BUMMER was born.
BABY BUMMER

BUMMER was in part an unintended consequence of an intense,
almost religious movement to promote free and open software in the
decade before the internet coalesced. Ironically, social and political
pressure from techie hippies is what drove entrepreneurs to focus
almost exclusively on ad-based business models when the internet
happened.
Whatever else the BUMMER companies brought into the world,
the feature that caught the public’s imagination most in the beginning
was probably that they were free. You didn’t need to pay Google for
a search or to upload or watch a video on YouTube; there was no fee
to join Facebook or Twitter.
Being free is what propelled these services to become so big so
fast. It is also the foundation of the BUMMER business plan that has
been so destructive, that has turned most of the human race into
part-time lab rats. (It’s also why bad actors can afford to launch an
unbounded number of fake people into the world.)
The notion of giving a high-tech information service away for free
and making money with ads was not new. Back in the early decades
of the twentieth century, there had not been any choice but to make
over-the-air radio and TV free, because there was no way for a
station to know who was tuning in. Who would you charge? Business
plans have a way of sticking around even when they’re obsolete,
however. Note that the ads didn’t go away when customers moved to
paid cable.
In the case of internet services, there was a choice from the start.
In fact, the very first design for a digital network, dating to Ted
Nelson’s work as a student in the 1960s, presumed that people
would pay and be paid in tiny increments for goodies on a digital
network. But that idea was pounded into virtual oblivion—albeit with
the best of intentions—by the free-software movement.

The movement to make software free was founded on an honest
mistake. It became dogma that if software wasn’t free, then it
couldn’t be open, meaning no one but the owner would see the
source code, so no one would understand what the software really
did. To be fair, that concern wasn’t based on speculation; companies
that sold software typically didn’t reveal source code. The reason
was that if the source code was revealed, then it could be modified
slightly and resold as a new program, which would deny sales to the
original developer.
Everyone knew that software would eventually become more
important than law, so the prospect of a world running on hidden
code was dark and creepy. Therefore, the transparency that must
underlie democracy, literacy, and decency was thought to be
incompatible with any business model but free. Free and open would
be forever bound together. But how would programmers make a
living if their code was freely copied? Maybe they could give away
the code and make money from being paid to solve problems that
came up. They’d enter a gig economy instead of a royalty economy.
They’d be laborers instead of accruing capital. But at least source
code would remain visible, so an open, democratic society would
flourish.
Nice sentiment, but it didn’t work. In the era when activists first
demanded that software be made open, the computers weren’t
connected yet. Now they are; they have been for decades. That
means that a BUMMER company can build a model of you in
software—and control what you see in a manipulative feed—by
running programs exclusively on their own computers. Those
computers are placed in super-secure locations you’ll never visit.
Their software is super-hyper secret. Every other kind of file has
been breached by hackers, but not the search or feed algorithms of
the big BUMMER companies. The secret code to manipulate you is
guarded like crown jewels.
The software that matters most is the most hidden, the least
revealed. Guess what? BUMMER software usually runs on a
foundation of free and open software (like the Linux/Apache stack).
But no one can know what is done on top of that free and open

foundation. The open-software movement failed absolutely in the
quest to foster openness and transparency in the code that now runs
our lives.
Things could have turned out better. Now that the computers are
connected, it is possible to imagine a collaboration tool that tracks
where each line of code, each digital image, and every sound came
from in a game, for example: to know who did what. That way,
everyone who contributes to a collaborative development project
could be paid in proportion to their contribution and how much the
game is played. Letting someone else tweak your code would no
longer mean that you wouldn’t get paid for your work at all. We have
failed to explore a world of possibilities.
CONFLICTED BUMMER

In the years before Google, the first major BUMMER company, was
born, hippie techies were fearsome advocates of making everything
information-related free, but that’s not the only ideal they loved.
Techies also practically worshipped hero entrepreneurs like Steve
Jobs. Tech business leaders were maybe not as smart as hackers,
as far as hackers were concerned, but they were still considered
visionaries. We liked it when they got rich. Who would want a future
that was designed by some kind of boring government or committeelike process? Look at the smooth and shiny computers that Steve
Jobs brought to the world!
So, two passions collided. Everything must be free, but we love
mega tech founder heroes.
Do you see the contradiction? Everything is supposed to be free,
but everything is also supposed to be about hero entrepreneurs, and
entrepreneurs make money. How can those two directives be
reconciled?
There was a lot of hedging and fudging on this point around the
turn of the century. Ultimately, only one method of reconciliation was
identified: the advertising business model. Advertising would allow
search to be free, music to be free, and news to be free. (That didn’t
mean that musicians or reporters got a piece of the pie, for the

techies considered them replaceable.) Advertising would become the
dominant business in the information era.
This didn’t feel dystopian at first. The original ads on Google were
cute and harmless. But as the internet, the devices, and the
algorithms advanced, advertising inevitably morphed into mass
behavior modification.
This is how BUMMER was born. As often happens with people,
we forgot that we made a choice. Now we feel helpless. But the
choice remains, and we can remake it.
BUMMER BLINDERS

The most dangerous thing about BUMMER is the widespread illusion
that BUMMER is the only possibility. There are Silicon Valley people
who believe that everything in the world can be reinvented/disrupted
by tech startups. We’ll disrupt medicine, education, transportation,
even the cycle of life and death, but we have a blind spot about our
basic method of operation. We have enshrined the belief that the
only way to finance a connection between two people is through a
third person who is paying to manipulate them. We feel locked into
this certainty, but the trap is only in our heads.
Inherent in the BUMMER business model is the assertion that
there is only one possible way for digital services to work, which is
that you, the individual user, must be made subservient. That is not
true. The prevalence of this message is one of the best reasons to
quit social media.
The BUMMER idea is so pervasive that it soaks into unrelated
businesses. We’ve taken as a fact of nature that if you want the
benefits of an app like Uber—using the latest tech to improve
coordination between drivers and people who need rides—then you
must accept that a few people will mostly own Uber and some of
them will become obnoxious oligarchs, while drivers will have less
security than old-fashioned cab drivers, and riders will be spied upon
in humiliating ways. None of these downsides need to occur to get
the benefits. The only reason for the linkage is that we’ve been
conditioned by BUMMER.

In some alternative universe—a universe we must build if we are
to survive—there will be both the convenience of an app like Uber
and a sustainable social and economic fabric in which a lot of people
build security with dignity.
The fundamental commercial product of BUMMER is absurd and
deleterious. You can’t make a society wealthy by making it crazy.
The only way out is to change the business model so that today’s
BUMMER companies can make money in a different way. That will
chart the way for other companies like Uber that rely on similar cloud
services and personal devices to adopt sustainable, dignified
business models. And they can!
BETTER THAN BUMMER

One way is to directly monetize services such as search and social
media. You’d pay a low monthly fee to use them, but if you
contributed a lot—if your posts, videos, or whatever are popular—
you could also earn some money. A large number of people, instead
of the tiny number of token stars in the present system, would earn
money. (I acknowledge, of course, that there would have to be a way
of making services available to those who couldn’t afford to pay even
a small fee.)
I’m making a fuss about the potential to earn because a system
like this would help address looming losses of employment due to AI
and automation. We’re talking about an industry that supports some
of the richest companies the world has ever known, and it’s all driven
by data that comes from people who are often being told that they’re
about to be obsolete, that they’ll need to go on the public dole with a
basic income system. It just isn’t right to tell people they are no
longer valuable to society when the biggest companies exist only
because of data that comes from those same people.
For instance, consider language translation. It’s great that we
have automatic translations of memos and web pages, say between
English and Chinese. But there isn’t some self-sufficient digital brain
behind the scenes that delivers these translations.

Instead, tens of millions of fresh phrase translations need to be
gathered every single day from real people who don’t know that data
is being taken from them. How is it being taken? Vast numbers of
bilingual individuals translate phrases all the time as part of their
BUMMER activity, perhaps to annotate a foreign TV show for their
friends. Anything you do on BUMMER is fair game, as far as the
BUMMER companies are concerned.
Translated phrases are matched to new phrases that other people
want to have translated, and a statistical mash-up of these
correspondences produces a generally readable text in another
language. The new translation examples have to be gathered every
day because languages are alive. Every day brings new events, pop
culture, and slang.
It’s wonderful that this technology works, but what’s not wonderful
is that the people who are supplying the data that make it work—
real, biological, bilingual humans—have become insecure. Human
translators have suffered a loss of career prospects that mirrors what
happened to investigative journalists, recording musicians,
photographers, and others.
We’re pretending that the people who know how to translate are
obsolete, when in truth they’re still needed. Isn’t it some kind of sin to
tell someone that they’re obsolete when it isn’t true?
What we call AI should never be understood as an alternative to
people, but instead as a mislabeled new channel of value between
real people.
The business plan of BUMMER is to sneakily take data from you
and make money off it. Look at how rich BUMMER companies are
and remember that their wealth is made entirely of the data you gave
them. I think companies should get rich if they make things people
want, but I don’t think you should be made less and less secure as
part of the bargain. Capitalism isn’t supposed to be a zero-sum
game.
BUMMER is economically unsustainable, which is even worse,
perhaps, than its being unfair. Bringing down a society to get rich is a
fool’s game, and Silicon Valley is acting foolishly.

Once we acknowledge that a translation program needs data
from real people, then those people might even be encouraged to
provide better, more useful data. The people might be valued
honestly, might get paid, and might feel a sense of earned dignity.
The translation service might then perform better! The fantasy of
human obsolescence not only undervalues people, but often makes
supposed AI programs less functional because no one is motivated
to improve the underlying data.
The stupidity of the BUMMER approach to human value
transcends economic unsustainability; it is a breach of human
dignity. That dimension will be explored in the tenth argument, on
spiritual concerns.
BUMMER was originally sold as a barter deal. “Let us spy on you
and in return you’ll get free services.” This might seem like a
reasonable deal in the short term, but in the long term it’s terrible.
The free services that you get are disguised versions of services
someone like you would otherwise be paid to provide. Musicians use
BUMMER to promote themselves for free, and yet a smaller
percentage of musicians are doing well enough to plan families—
which is a reasonable definition of “security”—than during the era
when music was sold on physical discs.1 Recording musicians;
language translators … who’s next?
Before the BUMMER era, any time a new technology came along
that made a set of human roles obsolete, new roles appeared that
were less physical. Car drivers instead of horsemen. Indeed, the
new roles that came into being because of tech disruptions were
often more creative and professional than the old ones. Robotics
programmers instead of ironworkers. This meant that more and more
people gained prestige and economic dignity.
BUMMER reversed the trend. Now, if you bring insight, creativity,
or expertise into the world, you are on notice that sooner or later
BUMMER will channel your value through a cloud service—probably
a so-called AI service—and take away your financial security, even
though your data will still be needed. Art might be created
automatically from data stolen from multitudes of real artists, for

instance. So-called AI art creation programs are already practically
worshiped. Then, robotic nurses might run on data grabbed from
multitudes of real nurses, but those real nurses will be working for
less because they’re competing with robotic nurses.
Everyone is feeding BUMMER data because they’re addicted and
trapped by network effects, as described in the first argument.
In the argument about how BUMMER is making you into an
asshole, I suggested that bringing in some level of reward system
beyond clannish mind games can inspire dignity in online relations. I
suggested LinkedIn as one example of how economic engagement,
instead of purely social engagement, can have a civilizing effect.
This hypothesis needs to be tested more, but it is possible that
when we enter into a new era in which people are paid for the value
their data brings to the online world, then that world will become less
dark and crazy.
The above sketch of an alternate business model for what are
now BUMMER services like social media and search is only one
possibility. I suspect there are others. This particular idea was
pitched in a book of mine called Who Owns the Future? Lately, this
approach to the future of digital economics has become known as
“Data as Labor.”2
DaL has gained traction in economics circles and is surely worth
further exploration. It won’t be perfect, but it will be better than
BUMMER.3
THE CORP PERSPECTIVE

The BUMMER companies should not fear a transition to a nonBUMMER business plan. It will be better for them!
I’m not anti-Google, for instance, even though I have
philosophical disagreements with some people there. My buddies
and I sold a startup to Google and I enjoyed many days hanging out
in the small, nascent seed of Google. I don’t think Google considered
as a set of people has turned evil, even if its business plan has.
I often hear that Google and Facebook will never change their
business models because the BUMMER model is so successful that

shareholders won’t allow it. I disagree.
One problem with the BUMMER model is that it’s like oil for a
petrostate. A BUMMER-dependent company can diversify its
activities—its cost centers—all it wants, but it can never diversify its
profit centers, because it always has to prioritize free services in
order to grab more data to run the manipulation services.
Consumers are addicted, but so are the BUMMER empires.
BUMMER makes tech companies brittle and weirdly stagnant. Of
the big five tech companies, only two depend on the BUMMER
model. Apple, Amazon, and Microsoft all indulge in a little BUMMER,
but they all do just fine without depending on BUMMER. The nonBUMMER big tech companies have successfully diversified. There
are plenty of reasons you might want to criticize and change those
three companies, but the amount of BUMMER they foster is not an
existential threat to civilization.
The two tech giants that are hooked on BUMMER, Google and
Facebook, are way hooked. They make the preponderance of their
profits from BUMMER despite massive investments in trying to start
up other types of businesses. No matter the scale, a company based
on a single trick is vulnerable. Sooner or later some disruption will
come along, and then a BUMMER company, no matter how large,
will quickly collapse.
So why is it again, that BUMMER is such a great long-term
strategy for tech companies? It isn’t. It trades the short term against
the long term, just like a petrostate.
Instead of trying to shut down BUMMER companies, we should
ask them to innovate their business models, for their own good.
THE USER PERSPECTIVE

It might sound undesirable to someday have to pay for things that
are currently free, but remember, you’d also be able to make money
from those things. And paying for stuff sometimes really does make
the world better for everyone. Techies who advocated a free/open
future used to argue that paying for movies or TV was a terrible
thing, and that the culture of the future would be made of

volunteerism, with the digital distribution funded by advertising, of
course. This was practically a religious belief in Silicon Valley when
the big BUMMER companies were founded. It was sacrilege to
challenge it.
But then companies like Netflix and HBO convinced people to pay
a monthly fee, and the result is what is often called “peak TV.” Why
couldn’t there also be an era of paid “peak social media” and “peak
search”?
Watch the end credits on a movie on Netflix or HBO. It’s good
discipline for lengthening your attention span! Look at all those
names scrolling by. All those people who aren’t stars made their rent
by working to bring you that show.
BUMMER only supports stars. If you are one of those rare, rare
people who are making a decent living off BUMMER as an
influencer,4 for instance, you have to understand that you are in a
tiny club and you are vulnerable. Please make backup plans! I hate
raining on dreams, but if you think you are about to make a living as
an influencer or similar, the statistics are voraciously against you, no
matter how deserving you are and no matter how many get-richquick stories you’ve been fed.5 The problem isn’t that there are only
a few stars; that’s always true, by definition. The problem is that
BUMMER economics allow for almost no remunerative roles for
near-stars. In a genuine, deep economy, there are many roles. You
might not become a pro football player, but you might get into
management, sports media, or a world of other related professions.
But there are vanishingly few economic roles adjacent to a star
influencer. Have a backup plan.
When social media companies are paid directly by users instead
of by hidden third parties, then they will serve those users. It’s so
simple. Someone will be able to pay to see poisonous propaganda,
but they won’t be able to pay to have that poison directed at
someone else. The incentive for poisoning the world will be undone.
I won’t have an account on Facebook, Google, or Twitter until I
can pay for it—and I unambiguously own and set the price for using

my data, and it’s easy and normal to earn money if my data is
valuable. I might have to wait a while, but it’ll be worth it.

ARGUMENT NINE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING POLITICS
IMPOSSIBLE

ARC BURN1

There used to be a moral arc to history, pointed out by Martin Luther
King Jr.; justice got broader over time. In one period, slaves were
freed; in another women got the vote; in another LGBTQ people
gained rights and respect. Democracy spread to more and more
countries.
Just recently, in the age of BUMMER, the arc is showing signs of
crashing to the ground and burning. There are not just backlashes as
we climb the arc, but unthinkable, catastrophic falls.
In recent years Turkey, Austria, the United States, India, and
other democracies have elected authoritarian-leaning leaders who
rely on tribalism for their power. Voters are choosing to negate
themselves. In each case, BUMMER played a prominent role. I
hope, dearly, that our times will be remembered as a momentary
glitch in a previously smooth progression toward a more democratic
world.
But for the moment we face a terrifying, sudden crisis. Before the
BUMMER era, the general thinking was that once a country went
democratic, it not only stayed that way but would become ever more
democratic, because its people would demand that.
Unfortunately, that stopped being true, and only recently.2
Something is drawing young people away from democracy. Despite

all the hopeful self-congratulations from social media companies, it
seems that when democracy has been weakened, the online world
has just gotten ugly and deceitful.
The correlation might be even stronger in developing regions.
Simple access to information technology, like the ability to send texts
with phones, has probably contributed to the marvelous and historic
reduction in abject poverty around the world in the past few decades.
But more recently, commercial social media showed up, and phones
turned into propagators of maniacal social violence.
One of the world’s great human rights catastrophes—unfolding as
I write—is the plight of the Rohingya population of Myanmar. As it
turns out, this crisis corresponded to the arrival of Facebook, which
was quickly inundated by shitposts aimed at the Rohingya.3 At the
same time, viral lies about child abductions, in that case mostly on
Facebook’s WhatsApp, have destabilized parts of India.4 According
to a United Nations report, social media is also a massively deadly
weapon, literally, in South Sudan—because of shitposts.5
Mysterious authors flood social media feeds with bizarre claims of
wrongdoing—variations of the blood libel—supposedly perpetrated
by a targeted group. Memes to stimulate genocide often report
something horrible that is said to have been done to children. As
always with BUMMER, the nastiest, most paranoid messaging gets
the most attention, and emotions spiral out of control as a byproduct
of engagement spiraling out of control.
All of these regions had problems before. History is filled with
weird, bad, or crazy politicians. It is also filled with mass hysterias
and violent mob delusions. And countries that fail. Are we really in
exceptional times?
It will only be possible for future historians to make that call. It
seems to me that something has gone bad and dark in our world,
and suddenly so, just in recent years, with the arrival of BUMMER.
It’s not that we’re seeing unprecedented horrors—they have
precedents—but that the precious arc of improvement has reversed.
We’re backsliding terribly and suddenly.

A typical story of social media in politics goes like this: A group of
hip, young, educated people gets into a social media platform first,
because these things come out of the hip, young, educated world.
They’re idealistic. They might be liberal, conservative, or anything.
They sincerely want the world to be better. That goes for both the
techies who make a BUMMER platform and the people out in the
world who use it.
They meet early successes, often spectacular, ecstatic
successes, but then the world turns sour, as if by magic. BUMMER
ultimately fuels loudmouthed assholes and con artists more than it
does the initial groups of hip, young, educated idealists, because in
the longer term BUMMER is more suited to sneaky, malevolent
manipulation than to any other purpose.
BUMMER studies early idealists and catalogs their quirks by its
very nature, without an evil plan. The results have the unintended
effect of lining idealists up so that they can be targeted with shitposts
that statistically make them just a little more irritable, a little less able
to communicate with dissimilar people, so a little more isolated, and
after all that, a little less able to tolerate moderate or pragmatic
politics.
BUMMER undermines the political process and hurts millions of
people, but so many of those very same people are so addicted that
all they can do is praise BUMMER because they can use it to
complain about the catastrophes it just brought about. It’s like
Stockholm syndrome or being tied to an abusive relationship by
invisible ropes. The sweet, early idealists lose, all the time thanking
BUMMER for how it makes them feel and how it brought them
together.
ARAB SPRING

The Arab Spring was an occasion for hearty self-congratulation in
Silicon Valley. We claimed it as our glory at the time. “Facebook
Revolution” and “Twitter Revolution” were common tropes back
then.6

We gathered in front of big screens watching kids in Tahrir Square
in Cairo taking on a despotic government and we were in love. We
celebrated as ordinary citizens used social media to tell NATO forces
where to target air strikes. Social media put a modern army at the
fingertips of ordinary social media users.
There had been revolutions before, but something was different
this time.
There wasn’t any particular charismatic figure, for instance. There
was no George Washington or Vladimir Lenin. Here, we thought,
was a revolution truly of the people. There were no generals
hunched over big tables with maps as underlings scurried around
them. There was no unifying manifesto, no general agreement or
even particularly focused discussion about what would come after
the revolution. The term “democracy” was thrown around, but there
was little discussion about what it meant. Democracy was confused
with a thin faith that online collective dynamics would lead to a better
world. A self-organized revolution could do no wrong. Here, we
thought, was the realization of our faith in networks.
I wasn’t so sure. Some of my friends got pissed at me when I
asked, “Where are those kids going to get jobs?” Or even worse, “Is
Twitter or Facebook going to get those kids jobs?” I also complained
that a revolution belonged to those accomplishing it, and it was
wrong to bring in the brand names of Silicon Valley companies.
Well, no one got them jobs, and indeed no one was around to
coherently claim power in Egypt other than theocratic extremists,
who were then ousted by a military coup, and almost none of the
inspiring young people who protested have decent jobs.
What social media did at that time, and what it always does, is
create illusions: that you can improve society by wishes alone; that
the sanest people will be favored in cutting contests; and that
somehow material well-being will just take care of itself. What
actually happens, always, is that the illusions fall apart when it is too
late, and the world is inherited by the crudest, most selfish, and least
informed people. Anyone who isn’t an asshole gets hurt the most.
So I was the cynic, but it turned out I wasn’t even close to being
cynical enough. No one wants to associate their tech company brand

with what happened next.
There had been reactions against revolutions before, as well as
hijacking of revolutions, corruptions of revolutions, reigns of terror,
and many other dysfunctions. But something was different this time.
A widespread phenomenon of networked nihilistic terror
exploded.7 Young people were watching the most awful, sadistic
videos, channeled to them by Silicon Valley companies, and the
dynamic was like porn. Kids became addicted to atrocity. That had
certainly happened all too often before, but in the past it had been
organized. Gangs had ruled history’s many killing fields, but now,
loners were “self-radicalizing.”
A lonely male persona became familiar, strutting in a made-up
world, bounded by the pettiest of illusions, filled with insecure rage.
But Silicon Valley’s faith in social media as a tool for social
improvement was not even tarnished. It still lives in me. As I write, on
New Year’s Day 2018, the Iranian regime is blocking social media to
suppress protests erupting around the country. An inner voice in me
rises up: “Yes! Yes, online technology is helping people organize and
they’ll be clever enough to route around attempts to shut them out.”
I don’t want to give up that hope. None of us do. But the evidence
thus far is not encouraging.
GAMERGATE

I was heartened when women started to speak up in the gaming
community. The gaming world is wonderful in a lot of ways, but it
really isn’t meeting its potential. Gaming should be turning into the
new way we learn and talk about complicated issues. That’s
happening to a small extent, but the biggest productions tend to
target the same demographic over and over again. You’ve got guns,
you’re traversing terrain, and you’re shooting at something. Over and
over. The industry needs to spread its wings more.
Developers who thought gaming should broaden in this way
made use of social media to communicate their ideas, and created a
vibrant, distributed movement. They earned attention and you could

feel the atmosphere shift a little. Many of those developers were
female.
What happened next was a rich-world version of what had
happened with the Arab Spring. The reaction was astonishingly
extreme and ugly, of a different order than the thing it was reacting
against.
Women who talked about gaming were attacked in vicious ways
that have since become terribly normal. They were bombarded with
fake images of themselves and their families being murdered, raped,
and so on.8 Their personal details were posted, forcing some women
to go into hiding.9
The movement to destroy critics of the gaming world was called
“Gamergate.” It’s impossible to talk to anyone who supports it,
because they live in an alternate universe of conspiracy theories and
dense jungles of stupid arguments fueled by the pettiest of illusions,
bursting with insecure rage.
Gamergate became a feeder and model for the alt-right.10
LGBTQ

In the years immediately before the 2016 election in the United
States, laws around LGBTQ issues started to change. Same-sex
marriage was legalized, trans people were more out and accepted.
Social media undoubtedly played a role.
But that was only the first stage in the process of BUMMER
degradation. That was the BUMMER honeymoon. Well-meaning
people won a historically smooth round in the fight, and it felt as if
any level of improvement in society you could dream of was in easy
reach.
It’s like a heroin high, as that has been described to me; an
incredible, easy, early burst of ecstasy, after which you’re inevitably
going down, catastrophically.
The next stage in BUMMER politics is the one in which assholes
realize they’re favored by BUMMER. All kinds of assholes appear.
They get enough attention to outpace the well-meaning people who
just won victories. They exhume horrible prejudices and hatreds that

haven’t seen the light of day for years, and they make those hatreds
mainstream.
Then it turns out that even bigger assholes manipulate the earlyadopter assholes. Then big bad things start to happen. Horrific, giant
assholes get elected, stupid xenophobic projects are elevated,
ordinary people suffer horrible, needless material losses, and wars
loom.
In the case of the United States, astonishingly extreme antiLGBTQ figures were elevated to the highest offices11 even though
LGBTQ dignity and rights issues were untouchable in terms of
argument during the election itself.
It’s not that BUMMER disfavors LGBTQ people. BUMMER could
care less. It’s that it favors con artists and assholes. These are
Components A and F, the wind in BUMMER’s sails.
NEITHER LEFT NOR RIGHT, BUT DOWN

BUMMER is neither liberal nor conservative; it is just pro-paranoia,
pro-irritability, and pro–general assholeness.
Remember, BUMMER isn’t that way at first. At first, nice earlyadopter people seem to get a boost. However, once those nice
people have been categorized, algorithmically probed and tested,
and readied for manipulation, then the assholes take over.
Who cares if I myself am liberal? If you are a principled
conservative, do you think you’ve really been well served by
BUMMER? My evangelical Christian conservative friends suddenly
find themselves wedged into social media communities that support
an obscene, cruel philanderer and abuser who made fortunes from
gambling and bankruptcies and who has stated, on the record, that
he doesn’t need or seek forgiveness from God.12 Meanwhile my
patriotic, hawkish conservative friends now find themselves aligned
with a leader who would almost certainly not be in office were it not
for cynical, illegal interventions by a hostile foreign power. Look what
BUMMER has done to your conservatism.
The same thing happens to liberals. Remember Bernie Bros?
Remember how it became cool in some liberal circles to cruelly

ridicule Hillary, as if doing so were a religion? In the age of BUMMER
you can’t tell what was organic and what was engineered.13
It’s random that BUMMER favored the Republicans over the
Democrats in U.S. politics, but it isn’t random that BUMMER favored
the most irritable, authoritarian, paranoid, and tribal Republicans.14
All those qualities are equally available on the left. If a U.S. version
of Hugo Chavez had come along, he could have been president.
Maybe it will happen in the future. Yuck.
As a lefty, I don’t think a BUMMER-style lefty leader would be any
better than Trump. Debasement is debasement, whatever direction it
comes from.
The ways that a “disaster artist” candidate can be preferred by
Facebook are well known, though the details remain opaque. When
a candidate, or any other customer, buys access to user attention
through Facebook, the amount of access isn’t just determined by
how much is spent, but by how well Facebook’s algorithms
determine the customer is also promoting and increasing the use of
Facebook. People who worked on the social media strategy of the
Trump campaign have claimed15 that Trump gained hundreds of
times more access16 for a given spend than did the Clinton
campaign, though Facebook claims that wasn’t so, without revealing
enough to make the story transparent.17 If there was a multiplier, it
probably applied as much to Russian operatives and other proTrump parties buying access on Facebook as to the Trump
campaign making direct purchases. The algorithms can’t care and
don’t care.
An interesting detail that came out a year after the election is that
Facebook had offered both the Clinton and Trump campaigns onsite
teams to help them maximize their use of the platform, but only
Trump’s campaign accepted the offer.18 Maybe if Clinton had agreed
to have Facebook employees in her office, she would have won. The
election was so close that any little thing that moved the needle in
her direction could have tipped the result.
Facebook and other BUMMER companies are becoming the
ransomware of human attention. They have such a hold on so much

of so many people’s attention for so much of each day that they are
gatekeepers to brains.
The situation reminds me of the medieval practice of indulgences,
in which the Catholic Church of the time would sometimes demand
money for a soul to enter heaven. Indulgences were one of the main
complaints that motivated Protestants to split off. It’s as if Facebook
is saying, “Pay us or you don’t exist.”
They’re becoming the existential mafia.
BLACK LIVES MATTER

After a dramatic series of awful killings of unarmed black citizens by
police in the United States, the initial reaction from sympathetic
social media users was for the most part wise, stoic, and
constructive. It must be said that we might not even have heard
much about these killings, their prevalence, or their similarities
without social media.
At first, social media engendered a universal sense of community.
The slogan “Black Lives Matter” initially struck me as remarkably
knowing and careful, for instance. Not a curse, not a swipe. Just a
reminder: our children matter. I suspect that a lot of people got the
same impression, even though many of them would come to ridicule
the same slogan not long after.
“Black Lives Matter” appeared and gained prominence during the
typical honeymoon phase of BUMMER activism, and, as always, that
early phase was hopeful and felt substantial. BUMMER was giving
black activists a new channel to influence and power. More money
and power for the BUMMER companies, for sure, but also more
empowerment for new armies of BUMMER users. Win/win, right?
But during that same honeymoon, behind the scenes, a deeper,
more influential power game was gearing up. The game that
mattered most was out of sight, occurring in algorithmic machinery in
huge hidden data centers around the world.
Black activists and sympathizers were carefully cataloged and
studied. What wording got them excited? What annoyed them? What
little things, stories, videos, anything, kept them glued to BUMMER?

What would snowflake-ify them enough to isolate them, bit by bit,
from the rest of society? What made them shift to be more targetable
by behavior modification messages over time? The purpose was not
to repress the movement but to earn money. The process was
automatic, routine, sterile, and ruthless.
Meanwhile, automatically, black activism was tested for its ability
to preoccupy, annoy, even transfix other populations, who
themselves were then automatically cataloged, prodded, and
studied. A slice of latent white supremacists and racists who had
previously not been well identified, connected, or empowered was
blindly, mechanically discovered and cultivated, initially only for
automatic, unknowing commercial gain—but that would have been
impossible without first cultivating a slice of BUMMER black activism
and algorithmically figuring out how to frame it as a provocation.
BUMMER was gradually separating people into bins and
promoting assholes by its nature, before Russians or any other client
showed up to take advantage. When the Russians did show up, they
benefited from a user interface designed to help “advertisers” target
populations with tested messages to gain attention. All the Russian
agents had to do was pay BUMMER for what came to BUMMER
naturally.
“Black Lives Matter” became more prominent as a provocation
and object of ridicule than as a cry for help. Any message can be
reframed to incite a given population if message vandals follow the
winds of the algorithms. Components F and A, locked together.
Meanwhile, racism became organized over BUMMER to a degree
it had not been in generations.
I wish I didn’t have to acknowledge this heartbreak. A lot of what
goes on at a user-to-user level in BUMMER is wonderful if you look
at it while ignoring the bigger picture in which people are being
manipulated by BUMMER. If you can draw a small enough frame to
include only the stuff that people are directly aware of on BUMMER,
then it often looks exquisite.
Black Twitter is a great example. It’s a distinct medium and
literature onto itself. Black Twitter is marvelously inventive and
expressive. And virtuosic. Black Twitter has run rings around Trump,

such as after the “NFL kneeling scandal.” Meanwhile, the stuff
outside of a Twitter user’s frame of awareness is intensely favored to
continue to subsume Black Twitter and make it powerless.
I want to celebrate Black Twitter because it’s brilliant. But I need
to point out it’s a cruel trap. Something similar to Black Twitter will
hopefully exist someday that isn’t subservient to BUMMER and won’t
be fundamentally designed to secretly study people in order to
manipulate them.
I want to be wrong about all this stuff, but so far BUMMER looks
worse and worse as more is revealed.
A year after the election, the truth started to trickle out. It turns out
that some prominent “black” activist accounts were actually fake
fronts for Russian information warfare. Component F. The Russian
purpose was apparently to irritate black activists enough to lower
enthusiasm for voting for Hillary. To suppress the vote, statistically.
That doesn’t mean that Russians placed thoughts into people’s
heads in any clear or reliable way. It doesn’t mean that the people
targeted by these campaigns were any less thoughtful, intelligent, or
strong-willed than anyone else. Most of what happened was
probably the “redlined” promotion of cynicism, a dismissive attitude,
and a sense of hopelessness (“redlining” refers to a sneaky way that
U.S. banks historically biased creditworthiness algorithms to disfavor
black neighborhoods). I am not saying that critiques of Hillary were
invalid, or that voter sentiment was uninformed; I am saying that
voter emotion was tweaked just a bit, enough to lower voter turnout.
Don’t forget that Facebook had already noisily published research
proving it can change voter turnout.19 In the published research,
Facebook used the cheerful example of boosting voter turnout. But
since Facebook is all about targeting and can calculate your political
affiliation, among many other things,20 and since it has also proven it
can make people sad,21 it is likely that social networks can also be
used to suppress voters who have been targeted because of how
they are likely to vote.
None of this means that Facebook prefers one kind of voter to
another. That’s up to Facebook’s customers, who are not you, the

users. Facebook doesn’t necessarily know what’s going on. A social
media company is in a better position if it doesn’t know what’s going
on, because then it makes just as much money, but with less
culpability.
We will never know what algorithmic tests took place in the
service of voter suppression or activation in any particular election,
or what lessons were learned. Maybe certain words in headlines, or
placement of certain ads adjacent to certain celebrity news, turned
out to improve the chances of making someone irritable, but only if
they liked certain cars.
All we can surmise is that a statistically driven enterprise adapted
continuously in order to optimize its performance.
Neither BUMMER nor Russian agents had to care about actual
black activism, one way or another. (As it happens, the individuals
who work at BUMMER companies tend to be liberal and are
probably mostly sympathetic to black activism, but that’s utterly
irrelevant to their effect upon the world so long as they adhere to the
mass manipulation business model.)
BUMMER makes more money when people are irritated and
obsessed, divided and angry—and that suited Russian interests
perfectly. BUMMER is a shit machine. It transforms sincere
organizing into cynical disruption. It’s inherently a cruel con game.
Black activists have every reason to feel good about their
immediately perceptible interactions on BUMMER; there is genuine
beauty and depth on that level. This other behind-the-scenes game
doesn’t make the visible game invalid. The only way in which looking
at the whole picture matters is in observing and understanding the
ultimate results.
Activists might feel confident they are getting their message out,
but it is indisputable that black activists have severely lost ground
politically, materially, and in every way that matters outside of
BUMMER.
As usual, after an algorithmically prompted catastrophe, many of
the people who have been betrayed and used like fools can only
praise BUMMER.

One example of Component F in the 2016 U.S. election was an
account called Blacktivist, which was run by the Russians. A year
after the elections, the true power behind Blacktivist was revealed
and reporters asked genuine black activists what they thought about
it.22 Some, fortunately, still had access to outrage. One activist
reportedly said, “They are using our pain for their gain. I’m
profoundly disgusted.” That is an informed, reasonable statement,
and a brave one, for it is not easy to accept that one has been
tricked.
People tend to rationalize. For instance, a civil rights attorney told
the same reporter, “If someone is organizing an event that benefits
accountability and justice, I don’t really care what their motives are or
who they are.” This is a typical rationalization from someone who
does not look outside the frame of familiar experience at the larger
picture where the game of BUMMER is played out.
At the end of the day, BUMMER moneymaking caused black
social media to unintentionally elevate a new tool optimized for voter
suppression. As if there weren’t enough voter suppression tools out
there already. As if gerrymandering, inaccessible polling stations,
and biased registration rules weren’t enough.
A lot of potential Hillary voters were infused with a not-great
feeling about Hillary, or about voting at all. Were you one of them? If
so, please think back. We’re you seeing any information customized
for you before the election? Did you use Twitter or Facebook? Did
you do a lot of online searches?
You were had. You were tricked. Your best intentions were turned
against you.
IF ONLY THIS GAME WERE ALREADY OVER

Even if the current atmosphere—our hell of insults and lies—has
started to seem normal,23 it really wasn’t like this before. I worry
about young people growing up in our mess and believing this is how
things always are.
While I was writing this book, a new social movement known as
#metoo arose, announcing a rejection of sexual harassment of

women. BUMMER algorithms are devouring everything about
#metoo right now, as I type. How can it be turned into fuel to
empower some asshole somewhere to annoy someone else in order
to make everyone more engaged/manipulated? How will activists be
goaded into becoming less sympathetic? What prospects will be
discovered by manipulator/advertisers who are trawling/trolling to
find ways to ruin the world?24

ARGUMENT TEN

SOCIAL MEDIA HATES YOUR SOUL

I MET A METAPHYSICAL METAPHOR

The previous nine arguments exposed a web of patterns within and
between people that has been disrupted by BUMMER.
To review: Your understanding of others has been disrupted
because you don’t know what they’ve experienced in their feeds,
while the reverse is also true; the empathy others might offer you is
challenged because you can’t know the context in which you’ll be
understood. You’re probably becoming more of an asshole, but
you’re also probably sadder; another pair of BUMMER disruptions
that are mirror images. Your ability to know the world, to know truth,
has been degraded, while the world’s ability to know you has been
corrupted. Politics has become unreal and terrifying, while
economics has become unreal and unsustainable: two sides of the
same coin.
All these dyads form a web of change in the human condition.
That web is so encompassing that we must go back to the first
argument and ask whether the explanatory metaphor it proposed
was too timid. The first argument proposed that BUMMER users are
trapped in addictive behavior-modification apparatuses. This is the
metaphor that some of the founders of BUMMER have chosen to
frame their regrets, and the pieces fall in place within that framing. It
is useful. But is it adequate?

Behavior-modification cages can only manipulate one creature at
a time, but when the whole society is being manipulated in a
coordinated way, we must seek a grander explanatory framework.
There aren’t many choices. The clearest one is probably religion.
Each of the arguments for deleting your accounts is at first glance
about a practical issue, such as trust, but on closer inspection, the
arguments confront the deepest and most tender concerns about
what it means to be a person.
When you use BUMMER, you implicitly accept a new spiritual
framework. It is like the EULA agreement—the user agreement—that
you clicked “OK” on without reading. You have agreed to change
something intimate about your relationship with your soul. If you use
BUMMER, you have probably, to some degree, statistically
speaking, effectively renounced what you might think is your religion,
even if that religion is atheism. You have been inducted into a new
spiritual framework.
I am not speaking rhetorically or being cute. This is a sincere
effort to illuminate what is happening.
THE FIRST FOUR PRINCIPLES OF BUMMER SPIRITUALITY

Let’s reconsider the first four arguments in spiritual terms.
The first argument is about free will. Free will is a mysterious idea; a
leap of faith. Does it even make sense? Maybe there is no free will;
maybe it is an illusion. But religions generally propose that free will is
real. It must exist in order for you to choose to change your karma
for the better, or to make moral choices that get you into heaven.
Even the most ethereal Buddhist must start with free will in order to
freely seek a state that transcends it.
Free will can feel old-fashioned. Cutting-edge nerdy philosophers,
engineers, and revolutionaries have been challenging it for centuries
now.
Why not conceive of people as naturally evolved machines, but
machines nonetheless? People could then be programmed to
behave well, and the human project could flourish. Behaviorists,

Communists, and now Silicon Valley social engineers have all tried
to achieve that end.
But each time a nerd attempts to remove free will from the stage,
it pops up with amplified concentration in a new spot. With the same
breath that proclaims that communal algorithms or artificial
intelligence will surpass individual human creativity, an enthusiast
will inevitably exclaim that a Silicon Valley entrepreneur, AI
programmer, or ideologue is a visionary who is changing the world,
denting the universe (in Steve Jobs’s phrase), and charting the
future.
The ritual of engaging with BUMMER initially appears to be a
funeral for free will. You give over much of your power of choice to a
faraway company and its clients. They take on a statistical portion of
your burden of free will, so that it is no longer in your purview. They
start to decide who you will know, what you’re interested in, what you
should do. But it is no secret that the people who run the scheme
have concentrated astonishing wealth and power in a ridiculously
short amount of time. They have power, but how could power exist if
free will does not?
So BUMMER intrinsically enacts a structural, rather than an
ontological, change in the nature of free will. It will continue to exist,
if under a barrage of insults. The important change is that you now
have less free will, and a few people whom you don’t know have
more of it. Some of your free will has been transferred to them. Free
will has become like money in a gilded age.
This change transcends economics and politics; it is the stuff of
those religions that have proposed that only leaders have a mandate
from heaven.
* * *
The second argument delineated a specific problem of concern, a
structure that I dubbed BUMMER. My purpose was to identify a wellbounded target for change instead of falling into despair about
everything in modernity. This structure turned out to be less a set of

technologies than it was a business plan that spewed perverse
incentives.
Another similarity to religions? Maybe my objection to BUMMER
is like when Protestants objected to indulgences. There is a long
history of people rejecting a structure connected with a religion while
not rejecting the core.
If the BUMMER theory is right, then the overall project of the
internet is not at fault. We can still enjoy the core of it. BUMMER
wants you to think that without BUMMER there would be no devices,
no internet, no support groups to help you through hard times, but
that is a lie. It is a lie you celebrate and reinforce when you use
BUMMER, just as someone who attends a corrupt church is
supporting its corruption.
* * *
The third argument is about becoming an asshole. Remember that
the idea is not that you become an asshole to everyone all the time,
but that your Solitary/Pack switch is set to Pack. You focus on
dynamics within the pack and between packs. You become an
asshole to members of other packs and those below you in your
pack hierarchy, and sometimes to competitive peers in the pack.
All you have to do is look at the role of religion in the conflicts
around the world, at this or other times, to see that this dynamic also
plays out in religions. Indeed, a common pattern today—with
examples sadly given in the argument on politics—is that BUMMER
resurrects old conflicts that had been associated with religion in
order to “engage” people as intensely as possible.
* * *
Argument Four was about undermining truth, so it’s a biggie from a
spiritual point of view.
A strict religion might demand that adherents believe certain
things that are not supported by evidence, or that are countered by
it. Some religious people still think the sun orbits around the earth,
for instance.1

Believing something only because you learned it through a
system is a way of giving your cognitive power over to that system.
BUMMER addicts inevitably at least tolerate a few ridiculous ideas in
order to partake at all. You have to believe sufficiently in the wisdom
of BUMMER algorithms to read what they tell you to read, for
instance, even though there’s evidence that the algorithms are not
so great.2 You must accept preposterous conspiracy theories in
order to avoid being trolled in much of the world of BUMMER. You
need to hold a worldview that dismisses whatever group of people
you’ve been counterpoised with by engagement algorithms.3
I’ve been using both the term “spiritual” and the term “religious,”
and here’s why: Religions generally are connected with specific truth
claims, while spirituality might not be. Spirituality can usually coexist
a little more easily with Enlightenment thinking.
The Enlightenment emphasized ways of learning that weren’t
subservient to human power hierarchies. Instead, Enlightenment
thinking celebrates evidence-based scientific method and reasoning.
The cultures of sciences and engineering used to embrace
Enlightenment epistemology, but now they have been overridden by
horribly regressive BUMMER epistemology.
You probably know the word “meme” as meaning a BUMMER
posting that can go viral. But originally, “meme” suggested a
philosophy of thought and meaning.
The term was coined by the evolutionary biologist Richard
Dawkins. Dawkins proposed memes as units of culture that compete
and are either passed along or not, according to a pseudo-Darwinian
selection process. Thus some fashions, ideas, and habits take hold,
while others become extinct.
The concept of memes provides a way of framing everything nonnerds do—the whole of humanities, culture, arts, and politics—as
similar instances of meme competition, mere subroutines of a
higher-level algorithm that nerds can master. When the internet took
off, Dawkins’s ideas were in vogue, because they flattered techies.
There was a ubiquitous genre of internet appreciation from the
very beginning in which someone would point out the viral spread of

a meme and admire how cute that was. The genre exists to this day.
Memes started out as a way of expressing solidarity with a
philosophy I used to call cybernetic totalism that still underlies
BUMMER.
Memes might seem to amplify what you are saying, but that is
always an illusion. You might launch an infectious meme about a
political figure, and you might be making a great point, but in the
larger picture, you are reinforcing the idea that virality is truth. Your
point will be undone by whatever other point is more viral. That is by
design. The architects of BUMMER were meme believers.
In the very big picture, virality might indeed be truth. Believing in
memes does turn to truth, but only eventually—very eventually. If
humanity destroys itself because malicious memes prevent us from
dealing with climate change, for instance, then eventually, in a
hundred million years, a species of intelligent octopus will take over
and perhaps come across our remains and wonder what went
wrong.
Rationality is different from evolution. It’s faster. We don’t know
how rationality works, however.
There is something going on in the mind beyond memes. Our
ability to conquer mystery is still a mystery. This can be a difficult
truth to accept, apparently, and some techies prefer to live in denial.
Here are some tough truths: We currently don’t have a scientific
description of a thought or a conversation. We don’t know how ideas
are represented in a brain. We don’t know what an idea is, from a
scientific point of view. That doesn’t mean we never will understand
these things scientifically, just that we don’t yet understand them. We
can pretend that we will understand them any minute, so it is as if we
already understand them, but then we are just lying to ourselves.
When we talk about politics, culture, art, or law, it’s possible that
quantity can’t replace quality, even though we can’t say what quality
is. It’s possible that the algorithms we know how to write simply can’t
distinguish terrorists or foreign intelligence agents from normal
people who aren’t trying to destroy the world.
The foundation of the search for truth must be the ability to notice
one’s own ignorance. Acknowledging ignorance is a beautiful feature

that science and spirituality hold in common. BUMMER rejects it.
Virality is truth for BUMMER politics, BUMMER art, BUMMER
commerce, and BUMMER life.
I’ve examined the first four arguments in more fundamental terms
than before. I won’t go through all ten; the principle that BUMMER is
replacing the features of spirituality with its own designs is
demonstrated enough in these examples. But I must dig deeper.
BUMMER FAITH

Not all questions can be addressed by evidence. So having faith
about them is not a rejection of evidence. Religions at their best
address the deepest, most important, and most tender questions that
we can’t approach scientifically, like the ultimate purpose of life, why
existence exists, what consciousness is, what death is, and the
nature of meaning.
In order to use BUMMER, you gradually acquiesce to BUMMER’s
answers to these questions. And BUMMER does provide answers:
terrible ones! This is the quality of BUMMER that might piss me off
the most.
The purpose of life, according to BUMMER, is to optimize.
According to Google: “Organize the world’s information.” But per the
typical Silicon Valley worldview, everything is information. Matter will
be hacked, the human body will be hacked, and so on. Therefore,
Google’s mission statement reads, within tech culture, as “Organize
all reality.” That’s why Google started all those weird Alphabet
companies. You might not have thought about Google’s worldview or
mission, but you buy into it when you optimize your presence to rank
high in search or optimize your video for views. The purpose of your
life is now to optimize. You have been baptized.4
Usually Google has had a way of coming up with the creepier
statements, but Facebook has pulled ahead: A recent revision in its
statement of purpose includes directives like assuring that “every
single person has a sense of purpose and community.”5 A single
company is going to see to it that every single person has a purpose,

because it presumes that was lacking before. If that is not a new
religion, I don’t know what is.
Google famously funded a project to “solve death.”6 This is such a
precisely religious pretension that I’m surprised the religions of the
world didn’t serve Google with a copyright infringement take-down
notice.7 Google could have framed its work as life extension, or as
aging research, but instead it went right for the prize, which is being
the master of that which is most sacred within you. BUMMER must
own you in order to own anything at all.
Facebook also plays the game. The Facebook page of a
deceased person becomes a shrine that one can only visit as a
member, and to be a member you must implicitly become an
adherent.
Google’s director of engineering, Ray Kurzweil, promotes the idea
that Google will be able to upload your consciousness into the
company’s cloud, like the pictures you take with your smartphone.
He famously ingests a whole carton of longevity pills every day in the
hope that he won’t die before the service comes online. Note what’s
going on here. The assertion is not that consciousness doesn’t exist,
but that whatever it is, Google will own it, because otherwise, what
could this service even be about?
I have no idea how many people believe that Google is about to
become the master of eternal life, but the rhetoric surely plays a role
in making it seem somehow natural and proper that a BUMMER
company should gain so much knowledge and power over the lives
of multitudes.
This is not just metaphysics, but metaphysical imperialism. If you
buy into any of this stuff, explicitly or just through practice, you
cannot even call yourself an atheist or agnostic. You are a convert.
BUMMER HEAVEN

One of the reasons that BUMMER works the way it does is that the
engineers working at BUMMER companies often believe that their
top priority among top priorities isn’t serving present-day humans,
but building the artificial intelligences that will inherit the earth. The

constant surveillance and testing of behavior modification in
multitudes of humans is supposedly gathering data that will evolve
into the intelligence of future AIs. (One might wonder if AI engineers
believe that manipulating people will be AI’s purpose.)
The big tech companies are publicly committed to an extravagant
“AI race” that they often prioritize above all else.8 It’s completely
normal to hear an executive from one of the biggest companies in
the world talk about the possibility of a coming singularity, when the
AIs will take over. The singularity is the BUMMER religion’s answer
to the evangelical Christian Rapture. The weirdness is normalized
when BUMMER customers, who are often techies themselves,
accept AI as a coherent and legitimate concept, and make spending
decisions based on it.9
This is madness. We forget that AI is a story we computer
scientists made up to help us get funding once upon a time, back
when we depended on grants from government agencies. It was
pragmatic theater. But now AI has become a fiction that has
overtaken its authors.
AI is a fantasy, nothing but a story we tell about our code. It is
also a cover for sloppy engineering. Making a supposed AI program
that customizes a feed is less work than creating a great user
interface that allows users to probe and improve what they see on
their own terms—and that is so because AI has no objective criteria
for success.
Who is to say what counts as intelligence in a program? Back in
the 1990s, my friends and I made the first programs that could track
a person’s face to turn it into an animated rendering of a creature or
another person making the same expressions in real time. It didn’t
occur to us to call that AI. It was just an example of fancy image
processing. But now, that capability is often called AI.
All kinds of different programs might or might not be called AI at a
given time, so when a program is called AI, the inevitable result is
that the criteria for success become vague. AI is a role-playing game
for engineers, not in itself an actual technical achievement.

Many of the algorithms that are called AI are interesting and
actually do things, of course, but they would be better understood—
and might even work better—without the AI storytelling. I gave an
example of this in the argument on economics. People who translate
between languages are being told they’re becoming obsolete. Not
only are they losing their livelihoods, but they are being robbed of
dignity, because the narrative of their obsolescence is a lie. They are
still valuable. They are needed because without their manually
created data, there would be no “automatic” translation service.
EXISTENCE WITHOUT BUMMER

It’s almost impossible to write about the deepest spiritual or
philosophical topics, because people are on such hair triggers about
them, but it would be a cop-out to avoid declaring a statement of
beliefs regarding the basic questions that BUMMER is trying to
dominate. I hope this statement will come off as rather generic and
uncontroversial, though hoping doesn’t make things so.
I am conscious. I have faith that you are also conscious. We each
experience.
It’s a marvel. I don’t think of experience as either natural or
supernatural. I don’t know enough to know whether those are the
only choices.
We can study brains, but we don’t know whether a brain
necessarily has to experience in order to do anything else.
Experience is a mystery, deeper than other mysteries, because we
know of no way to break it into parts to study it. We don’t know
whether it makes sense to talk about particles of experience (which
some people call “qualia”).
We can find in the existence of experience a thread of hope that
there’s an afterlife, but the mere fact that we experience while alive
is no proof. Even so, it is not irrational to base faith or hope for an
afterlife on the mysterious existence of internal experience in this life.
None of us really knows what’s going on in our strange situation of
reality, but if you perceive a sense of positivity, of grace and

progressive creativity in the world, then perhaps experience
connects to more.
We can acknowledge experience, we can enjoy it, we can have
an emotional reaction to the mystery of it, perhaps even a pleasant
one. Acknowledging that experience exists might make us kinder,
since we understand people to be more than machines. We might be
a little more likely to think before hurting someone if we believe
there’s a whole other center of experience cloaked in that person, a
whole universe, a soul.
BUMMER ANTI-MAGIC

Should machines be given “equal rights,” as is so often proposed in
tech culture? Indeed, Saudi Arabia has granted citizenship to a
“female” robot, and with that citizenship, rights not available to Saudi
human women.10
This is a big problem with human-machine equivalence. Imagine
a metaphorical circle of empathy that informs your actions. Within
your circle are those you accept and humanize. If you make your
circle too wide, it is diluted; you make your empathy absurd and
become blind to how you are hurting real people. The Saudis are not
the only ones who promote empathy for mute props as a way to
deny empathy to real but muzzled humans. It’s also been done in the
name of anti-abortion activism11 and animal rights.
The BUMMER business is interwoven with a new religion that
grants empathy to computer programs—calling them AI programs—
as a way to avoid noticing that it is degrading the dignity, stature, and
rights of real humans.
Consciousness is the only thing that isn’t weakened if it’s an
illusion. You’d have to experience the illusion in order for the illusion
to exist. But the flip side of that is that if you choose not to notice that
you’re experiencing, you can negate your own consciousness.
You can make your own consciousness go poof. You can
disbelieve in yourself and make yourself disappear. I call it antimagic.

If you design a society to suppress belief in consciousness and
experience—to reject any exceptional nature to personhood—then
maybe people can become like machines.
That’s happening with BUMMER. The BUMMER experience is
that you’re just one lowly cell in the great superorganism of the
BUMMER platform. We talk to our BUMMER-connected gadgets
kind of as if they’re people, and the “conversation” works better if we
talk in a way that makes us kind of like machines. When you live as if
there’s nothing special, no mystical spark inside you, you gradually
start to believe it.
If this new challenge to personhood were only a question of
spiritual struggle within each person, then perhaps we could say it is
each person’s responsibility to deal with it. But there are profound
societal consequences.
Spiritual anxiety is a universal key that explains what might
otherwise seem like unrelated problems in our world. Modernity is
most often presented by BUMMER technologists as an assault on
human specialness, and people naturally react in horror, as if they
might be negated. It is a rational response because it is a response
to what has actually been said.
The issues that are tearing the United States apart are all about
whether people are special, about where the soul might be found, if it
is there at all. Is abortion acceptable? Will people become obsolete,
so that everyone but a few elite techies will have to be supported by
a charitable basic income scheme? Should we treat all humans as
being equally worthy, or are some humans more deserving of selfdetermination because they are good at nerdy tasks? These
questions might all look different at first, but on closer inspection they
are all versions of the same question: What is a person?
Whatever a person might be, if you want to be one, delete your
accounts.

CONCLUSION: CATS HAVE NINE LIVES

I hope this book has helped you become a cat, but please be aware
that I haven’t included all the arguments about social media that you
should consider; I haven’t even come close. I have only presented
arguments for which I have an uncommonly informed perspective or
expertise.
This book doesn’t address problems related to family dynamics,
to untenable pressures placed on young people, especially young
women (please read Sherry Turkle on those topics), the way
scammers can use social media to abuse you, the way social media
algorithms might discriminate against you for racist or other horrible
reasons (please read Cathy O’Neil on that topic), or the way your
loss of privacy can bite you personally and harm society in surprising
ways. This book only scratches the surface. Remember, I’m a cat.
It might seem strange that a Silicon Valley denizen like me would
be asking you to resist us. When you engage with us, when you
resist creatively, you counter other forces, the bizarre financial
incentives I’ve described, that already constrain us. In a way, your
resistance can help free us. I am not asking for opposition, I am
asking for help.
The best way you can help is not to attack those who would
manipulate you from afar, but simply to free yourself. That will
redirect them—us—and make us find a better way to do what we do.
How can you survive without social media? I don’t know you, so I
can’t say—and there will probably be some innovation required—but
in general: Don’t reject the internet; embrace it! The internet itself is
not the problem.

You don’t need to give up friends: Email your friends instead of
using social media, but use accounts that aren’t read by the provider
—so no Gmail, for instance. No need for a sneaky company between
you and your friends.
You can still get news online: Read news websites directly
(instead of getting news through personalized feeds), especially sites
that hire investigative reporters. Get a feel for the editorial voice of
each site, which is only available when you go direct. Subscribe to
great news sites! Read three a day and you’ll be better informed
than social media users, and in less time. Consider using browser
extensions that block the comments.
You won’t stew in the dark: If you want to find things to do, look up
local culture and events websites; there are usually wonderful ones
run by dedicated local people. Start your own website!
You can even still watch YouTube videos, for now at least, without
a Google account. Watching without an account and with some
privacy plugins will give you access to a much less manipulative
experience.
Sounds like work, right? But no matter how much effort you put in,
you’ll probably still save time overall by taking control of your own
life. You’ll be amazed to discover how much of your time was taken
up before by BUMMER schemes.
Quit ’em all! Instagram and WhatsApp are still Facebook and still
scoop your data and snoop on you. Don’t tweet about how you quit
Facebook or post to Facebook about how you quit Twitter.
Your goal should not necessarily be to force governments to
regulate or even nationalize Facebook before you’ll rejoin, or to force
Facebook to change its business model, even though those are
achievements that must precede the long-term survival of our
species. Your immediate goal is to be a cat.
It’s like learning to write. You can’t read well until you can write at
least a little. The reason we teach writing to students is not in the
hopes that they’ll all become professional writers. That would be too
cruel. Instead, we hope they’ll learn what it means to write, and to
think, which will make them more thoughtful when they read. You
can’t use the internet well until you’ve confronted it on your own

terms, at least for a while. This is for your integrity, not just for saving
the world.
It’s unlikely that there will be a vast wave of people quitting social
media all at once; the combination of mass addiction with networkeffect lock is formidable. But as more people become aware of the
problems, they—you—can speak to the hearts of the tech industry
and have an impact. If you drop accounts even for a while, it helps.
There’s a deeper truth. Change is hard, but by offering goodnatured pressure, you will be giving techies help we secretly need
and even want. Techies can become isolated through extreme
wealth and might seem unreachable, but actually we miss you. It
doesn’t feel good to be separated from society. When techies
engage with fixing problems they helped create, they become
connected again, and that feels good. If you can find a way to
challenge us without vilification, it’s good for us. Taking charge of
your own information life is a great way to do that.
To conclude, I must remind you that the goal here isn’t to
convince you of what to think or what to do. It is not my job to
change you, any more than it should be a BUMMER company’s job.
However, unless and until you know yourself, even you won’t have
standing to argue about what’s right for you. And you can’t know
yourself unless you go to the trouble to experiment a bit.
I realize that we live in a world of stunning inequality, and not
everyone has the same options. Whoever you are, I hope you have
options to explore what your life might be, especially if you are
young. You need to make sure your own brain, and your own life,
isn’t in a rut. Maybe you can go explore wilderness or learn a new
skill. Take risks. But whatever form your self-exploration takes, do at
least one thing: detach from the behavior-modification empires for a
while—six months, say? Note that I didn’t name this book Arguments
for Deleting Your Social Media Accounts Right Now and Keeping
Them Deleted Forever. After you experiment, you’ll know yourself
better. Then decide.

THANK-YOUS

This book arose in an unusual way. After you write a book, you talk
to journalists about it. When I talked to journalists about my previous
book, which was about virtual reality, the conversation often turned
to a different, immediately urgent topic. Social media was playing a
role in making the world newly dark and crazy, and I was asked
about that. This book arose from things I thought of to say when
confronted. I must thank the journalists who forced this issue,
including Tim Adams, Kamal Ahmed, Tom Ashbrook, Zoë Bernard,
Kent Bye, Maureen Dowd, Moira Gunn, Mary Harris, Ezra Klein,
Michael Krasny, Rana Mitter, Adi Robertson, Peter Rubin, Kai
Ryssdal, Tavis Smiley, Steven Tweedie, and Todd Zwillich.
Thanks to Jerry Mander; this book’s title is a tribute to his work.
Thanks to Kevin, Satya, and my many other colleagues at
Microsoft for accepting a nonconformist in their ranks. That said, I
am speaking strictly for myself. Nothing here represents a Microsoft
point of view.
Our cats Loof, Potato, Tuno, and Starlight taught me how to not
be domesticated, but not as much as the master teacher, my
daughter, Lilibell. And of course thank you, Lena, my wonderful wife.

NOTES

Please note that some of the links referenced throughout this work
may no longer be active.
INTRODUCTION, WITH CATS
1. http://www.movingimage.us/exhibitions/2015/08/07/detail/how-cat
s-took-over-the-internet/
2. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smithsonian-institution/ask-smi
thsonian-are-cats-domesticated-180955111/
3. Peace, dog lovers! Here’s a speculation that dogs domesticated
themselves, like cats: https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
2013/03/130302-dog-domestic-evolution-science-wolf-wolves-hu
man/.

ARGUMENT ONE: YOU ARE LOSING YOUR FREE WILL
1. https://www.axios.com/sean-parker-unloads-on-facebook-250803
6343.html
2. https://gizmodo.com/former-facebook-exec-you-don-t-realize-it-b
ut-you-are-1821181133. Though I must note that Palihapitiya
walked back his statement a bit in the following days, talking
about how he thought Facebook did good overall in the world.
3. https://mashable.com/2014/04/30/facebooks-new-mantra-move-f
ast-with-stability/
4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catfishing
5. The optimization of timing is only one example out of many.
Every design choice in your social media experiences is being
optimized all the time on similar principles. Ex-Googler Tristan
Harris has assembled more examples, including the way options
of all kinds are shown to you, the way you are able to click on
options, and the ways that you and others are shown options in
tandem. Look for his essays, including “How Technology Hijacks
People’s Minds,” at http://www.tristanharris.com/.
6. Mathematicians often think of this process as crawling around on
an imaginary “energy landscape.” Each position on the energy
landscape corresponds to a setting for parameters that might
change, so as you metaphorically crawl on the landscape you are
exploring different parameter settings. The five-second mark
would correspond to a valley that the algorithm has settled into.
Deeper is better in this visualization, because it takes less energy
to be deeper, or you could think of the metaphor as digging
deeper into buried gold deposits. Within this thought world, the
two-and-a-half-second setting is a deeper valley that you’d never
find by taking small steps from the bottom of the five-second
valley, because you always slide back. The only way to find the
deeper valley is by being forced to make a big speculative leap.
7. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10899-015-9525-2
8. This is a reference to a play by Jean-Paul Sartre; look it up!
9. http://people.hss.caltech.edu/~lyariv/papers/DarkSide1.pdf

10. http://esciencenews.com/articles/2008/09/25/from.12.years.onwa
rd.you.learn.differently
11. https://source.wustl.edu/2015/05/carrot-or-stick-punishments-ma
y-guide-behavior-more-effectively-than-rewards/
12. https://hbr.org/2017/09/what-motivates-employees-more-rewards
-or-punishments
13. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/job.725/pdf
14. https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/24850
15. http://friendlyorangeglow.com/
16. “Scaling” is Silicon Valley talk for making something giant. I
include myself in the “we” because in the 1990s I used to be the
chief scientist of the engineering office of Internet2, the
consortium of universities charged with solving the problem of
how to make the internet continue to function as it became giant.
17. A monopoly exists when there is only one seller, while a
monopsony exists when there is only one buyer. You could say
that the iOS and Android smartphone platforms are a duopoly,
because they are effectively the only channels for smartphone
apps, but you could also say they are a duopsony, because any
money that flows into apps has to go through them.
18. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2017/10/3
1/facebook-google-and-twitter-are-set-to-testify-on-capitol-hill-her
es-what-to-expect/
19. https://thestrategybridge.org/the-bridge/2017/5/10/how-russia-we
aponized-social-media-in-crimea

ARGUMENT TWO: QUITTING SOCIAL MEDIA IS THE
MOST FINELY TARGETED WAY TO RESIST THE
INSANITY OF OUR TIMES
1. https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/09/has-the-s
martphone-destroyed-a-generation/534198/
2. https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/12/03/how-the-internet-is-des
troying-everything/
3. http://www.berkeleywellness.com/self-care/preventive-care/articl
e/are-mobile-devices-ruining-our-eyes
4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_God_that_Failed
5. https://www.forbes.com/sites/elizabethmacbride/2017/12/31/is-so
cial-media-the-tobacco-industry-of-the-21st-century/
6. https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/20258_LEGISLATIVEHIST
ORY.PDF
7. The television era tried its best to be BUMMER, but without direct
feedback loops to individuals. Through heroic effort, television
was able to be slightly BUMMER even without much data.
“Cultivation theory” studies the phenomenon. See https://en.wikip
edia.org/wiki/Cultivation_theory
8. This history will be recounted in later arguments.
9. While digital spending on advertising and marketing might still be
a little shy of half of all such spending globally—remember TV is
still strong, especially for the aging generations that grew up with
it—overall spending is going up, most new spending is digital,
and almost all of that is BUMMER. Why should a society be
spending more and more of its wealth on “advertising”? There
are a huge number of industry reports on this topic, and
estimates vary, but most analysts agree on this overall
interpretation.
10. Why is Google counted as alpha BUMMER? For one thing,
Google invented the stuff before Facebook existed. Even so, if
you’re using only certain Google offerings, like Docs, you might
not experience Google as BUMMER. Google’s search, YouTube,
and certain other services meet the criteria for BUMMER,
however, even though they’re not usually classified as social

networking. YouTube uses an adaptive profile of you to drive a
personalized feed of videos that is designed to be addictive,
including an often nasty comments section, and it makes money
when third parties pay to change what you see in order to change
your behavior. Classic BUMMER. Furthermore, the content of
your seemingly non-BUMMER Google activities, like composing
emails, contributes data to the model that drives the BUMMER
part.
11. https://slate.com/technology/2018/03/twitter-is-rethinking-everythi
ng-at-last.html

ARGUMENT THREE: SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU
INTO AN ASSHOLE
1. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/30/business/hollywood-apartm
ent-social-media.html
2. WhatsApp is part of Facebook; even if it sometimes feels like any
other texting platform, it’s in fact a primary data scooper for
BUMMER. Facebook has faced considerable legal blowback for
using WhatsApp data that way in Europe (see https://www.thever
ge.com/2017/12/18/16792448/whatsapp-facebook-data-sharingno-user-consent). In the United States, since the network
neutrality rules are being relaxed, it’s possible that all texting,
even native texting between phones, will become part of
BUMMER, but as of this writing it doesn’t appear to have
happened.
3. The most prominent current academic approach to the study of
asshole creation is SIDE Theory. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wik
i/Social_identity_model_of_deindividuation_effects, but please
promise me you won’t become a jerk in an edit war about this
entry, okay? If you want to read relevant research from a scientist
working for Facebook, see the work of Justin Cheng: https://www.
clr3.com/.
4. http://leesmolin.com/writings/the-trouble-with-physics/
5. Shout-out to Tim Wu.
6. https://www.recode.net/2016/12/29/14100064/linkedin-daniel-roth
-fake-news-facebook-recode-podcast
7. http://www.spiegel.de/international/zeitgeist/smartphone-addictio
n-is-part-of-the-design-a-1104237.html
8. When you’re not on BUMMER it becomes possible to be tough
and yet not a jerk. What I hope is happening in this book is that
I’m using salty language and getting emotional, and yet I don’t
vilify and condemn people. “BUMMER sucks, but it’s mostly just
a stupid business plan, and the people behind it are usually great
and just made a mistake and we all need to outgrow it.” See? It’s
not that hard to be firm and intense without having to hate. In
fact, out here in reality, it’s hard to even remember what it feels

like to have your inner troll try to take over. That’s why I’m writing
this as a book instead of an online post.

ARGUMENT FOUR: SOCIAL MEDIA IS UNDERMINING
TRUTH
1. https://backissues.time.com/storefront/2017/is-truth-dead-/prodT
D20170403.html
2. https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technologydisrupted-the-truth
3. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/01/27/technology/socia
l-media-bots.html
4. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ashleymadison-cyber/infidelity
-website-ashley-madison-facing-ftc-probe-ceo-apologizes-idUSK
CN0ZL09J
5. https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2011/02/11/ashley-madi
son-lessons-in-promoting-a-sleazy-business/
6. https://slate.com/technology/2018/01/robots-deserve-a-first-amen
dment-right-to-free-speech.html
7. http://money.cnn.com/2017/05/24/media/seth-rich-fox-news-retra
ction/index.html
8. That is not to say that there is a conspiracy between new- and
old-media companies. There has been more tension than
cooperation. Remember, BUMMER is an automatic system that
has been set in motion to optimize itself. It finds patterns that
work, even when those patterns defy the emotional or political
tendencies of those who make money from the patterns.
Tensions between Fox News and Facebook are well known:
Facebook is absorbing money that once would have been
destined for old media.
9. https://www.dailydot.com/unclick/shitposting/
10. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/oct/31/facebook-rus
sia-ads-senate-hearing-al-franken
11. https://respectfulinsolence.com/2017/09/28/antivaxers-on-twitter-f
ake-news-and-twitter-bots/
12. https://www.forbes.com/sites/robertglatter/2017/12/23/bot-or-nothow-fake-social-media-accounts-can-jeopardize-your-health/
13. https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/04/06/anti-vac
cine-movement-is-giving-diseases-a-2nd-life/7007955/

ARGUMENT FIVE: SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING WHAT
YOU SAY MEANINGLESS
1. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2017/07/03/youtube-refun
ds-advertisers-terror-content-scandal/
2. https://www.theverge.com/2015/2/4/7982099/twitter-ceo-sent-me
mo-taking-personal-responsibility-for-the/
3. http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-41693437
4. Mathematicians who work in finance.
5. I wrote about it in my 2010 book You Are Not a Gadget.
6. http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2013/07/how_o
ne_weird_trick_conquered_the_internet_what_happens_when_y
ou_click_on.html
7. Recall the footnote about energy landscapes from the first
argument? If you do, then read this footnote! Tweaking to
optimize your design within a system that isn’t based on the
unbounded nature of nature, but is instead based on a bounded,
abstract, human construction, will inevitably kill creativity and
progress by rutting you in a petty valley in the energy landscape.

ARGUMENT SIX: SOCIAL MEDIA IS DESTROYING
YOUR CAPACITY FOR EMPATHY
1. https://www.snopes.com/pizzagate-conspiracy/
2. Here I am using the term “empathy” to mean an ability to
understand what other people are experiencing and why; to
imagine one being in another’s place. The term can mean
different things at different times. When it entered the English
language about a century ago, it was originally meant to convey
the way a person might imagine it would feel to be any other part
of the universe, like a mountain or a grape, which were two
examples from the earliest thought experiments; it was a term of
art for the aesthetic and psychological premonitions of virtual
reality. See https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/10/ashort-history-of-empathy/409912/
3. https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/309214/the-filter-b
ubble-by-eli-pariser/9780143121237/
4. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jul/31/facebook-da
rk-ads-can-swing-opinions-politics-research-shows
5. https://www.forbes.com/sites/jaymcgregor/2017/07/31/why-faceb
ook-dark-ads-arent-going-away/
6. https://slate.com/technology/2018/02/no-a-study-did-not-claim-th
at-fake-news-on-facebook-didnt-affect-the-election.html
7. Since I live in Berkeley, my town is periodically invaded by altright people who want to demonstrate. What astounds me is that
several times men with conservative bumper stickers on their
pickups have thrown nasty looks at me and my family, and they
know nothing about us. Once, one of them swerved in a mock
“Maybe I’ll run you over” moment. If I could know what that driver
had seen, then I would have a chance at empathy. It might be
possible to talk. BUMMER has robbed us of that possibility.
8. https://www.wired.com/story/free-speech-issue-reddit-change-my
-view/

ARGUMENT SEVEN: SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU
UNHAPPY
1. https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.3550
2. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2886783
3. http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0
069841
4. https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-abstract/185/3/203/2915143
5. http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/3/1/150292
6. http://www.ajpmonline.org/article/S0749-3797(17)30016-8/fulltext
7. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/may/01/facebookadvertising-data-insecure-teens
8. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S074756321400
1241
9. https://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/01/opinion/jaron-lanier-on-lack
-of-transparency-in-facebook-study.html
10. http://www.pnas.org/content/111/24/8788.full
11. https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2017/12/hard-questions-is-spendi
ng-time-on-social-media-bad-for-us/
12. https://slate.com/human-interest/2018/01/the-facebook-moms-gr
oup-that-has-helped-me-raise-kids-without-going-crazy.html
13. Here’s a study that detects both positive and negative effects of
social media use and is able to characterize them: http://www.jah
online.org/article/S1054-139X(15)00214-1/abstract/.
The
connection aspect of social media was helpful to college-age
women who were concerned about their weight, while the mutual
ranking aspect was not. This result reinforces the hypothesis that
the connections made possible by the internet can be positive,
but that certain additional structures, typically emphasized by
commercial social media, cause harm.
14. There are positive effects of social media in certain
circumstances, of course. The overall effect on individuals and
the world, however, is negative. A good journal for academic
research on the topic is Media Psychology, published by Taylor
and Francis: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hmep20/. A credible
researcher in the employ of Facebook who highlights instances

of positivity in social media is Moira Burke: http://www.thoughtcru
mbs.com/.
15. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S07475632163
02941
16. https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2015-05/sdsu-caa0504
15.php
17. http://annenberg.usc.edu/news/around-usc-annenberg/family-tim
e-decreasing-internet-use
18. https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/sep/23/stress-anxietyfuel-mental-health-crisis-girls-young-women
19. http://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/early/2017/10/16/1708518114.f
ull.pdf
20. http://www.smh.com.au/technology/smartphone-apps/fuelling-amental-health-crisis-instagram-worst-social-network-for-young-pe
oples-mental-health-20170520-gw9fvq.html
21. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/nsa-breach-shadow-brokers-mic
hael-morell/
22. https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/mar/07/wikileaks-publi
shes-biggest-ever-leak-of-secret-cia-documents-hacking-surveilla
nce
23. You could add Trump’s tax returns to this rarefied list.
24. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/us/politics/facebook-ads-po
litics.html
25. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2475265
26. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-immigration-visa/trump-ad
ministration-approves-tougher-visa-vetting-including-social-media
-checks-idUSKBN18R3F8
27. https://www.forbes.com/sites/adp/2016/10/24/how-to-legally-usesocial-media-to-recruit/#1fd4ebce29f4
28. https://www.tuition.io/2014/04/social-media-shocker-twitter-faceb
ook-can-cost-scholarship-admissions-offer/
29. https://www.edmunds.com/auto-insurance/car-insurance-compan
ies-use-facebook-for-claims-investigations.html
30. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/aclu-geofee
dia-facebook-twitter-instagram-black-lives-matter

31. https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2014/10/03/god-view-ub
er-allegedly-stalked-users-for-party-goers-viewing-pleasure/
32. http://fortune.com/2016/04/27/zuckerberg-facebook-control/
33. https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/does-quitting-s
ocial-media-make-you-happier-yes-say-young-people-doing-it

ARGUMENT EIGHT: SOCIAL MEDIA DOESN’T WANT
YOU TO HAVE ECONOMIC DIGNITY
1. I defended this claim in my previous books You Are Not a Gadget
and Who Owns the Future?
2. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3093683/;
https://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/217343
90-and-new-paper-proposes-should-data-providers-unionise-sho
uld-internet
3. Some internet sites that might have gone BUMMER are flirting
with the subscription model: https://mobile.nytimes.com/2017/05/
20/technology/evan-williams-medium-twitter-internet.html.
4. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/social-media-influencers-brand-a
dvertising/
5. https://news.vice.com/en_ca/article/8xmmb4/what-does-it-take-to
-make-a-living-on-social-media

ARGUMENT NINE: SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING POLITICS
IMPOSSIBLE
1. This is a chapter about politics. Before going any further, I have
to say something obvious. This is a vital topic and I’ve seen a
side of it you probably haven’t, so I want to tell you about that. At
the same time, I’m a white techie, but in order to proceed I must
talk about things I can’t know as well as I know my own world,
like the black experience in America. I’m probably going to fall
into the traps of whitesplaining, mansplaining, techsplaining, or
other forms of ’splaining. Can we just stipulate that that’s true?
I’m sure it is. Please take what you can use from me. I know I
don’t know everything.
2. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/06/millennials-are-rapidlylosing-interest-in-democracy/
3. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/29/business/facebook-misinfor
mation-abroad.html
4. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/indias-million
s-of-new-internet-users-are-falling-for-fake-news%E2%80%94so
metimes-with-deadly-consequences/2017/10/01/f078eaee-9f7f-1
1e7-8ed4-a750b67c552b_story.html
5. http://www.securitycouncilreport.org/atf/cf/%7B65BFCF9B-6D274E9C-8CD3-CF6E4FF96FF9%7D/s_2016_963.pdf
6. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/books/review/how-an-egypti
an-revolution-began-on-facebook.html
7. https://www.wired.com/2016/03/isis-winning-social-media-war-he
res-beat/
8. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4858216/Victim-Gamerga
te-s-horrific-online-abuse-reveals-trauma.html
9. http://time.com/3923651/meet-the-woman-helping-gamergate-vic
tims-come-out-of-the-shadows/
10. http://www.zero-books.net/books/kill-all-normies
11. https://transequality.org/the-discrimination-administration
12. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts-of-faith/wp/2016/06/
08/trump-on-god-hopefully-i-wont-have-to-be-asking-for-much-for
giveness/

13. https://www.rawstory.com/2017/03/russians-used-bernie-bros-asunwitting-agents-in-disinformation-campaign-senate-intel-witnes
s/
14. https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2018/2/24/17047880/con
servatives-amplified-russian-trolls-more-often-than-liberals
15. https://www.wired.com/story/how-trump-conquered-facebookwith
out-russian-ads/
16. Brad Parscale, the Trump campaign’s social media director,
tweeted: “I bet we were 100x to 200x her. We had CPMs that
were pennies in some cases. This is why @realDonaldTrump
was a perfect candidate for FaceBook.”
17. https://slate.com/technology/2018/03/did-facebook-really-chargeclinton-more-for-ads-than-trump.html
18. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/facebook-embeds-russia-and-th
e-trump-campaigns-secret-weapon/
19. http://www.nature.com/news/facebook-experiment-boosts-us-vot
er-turnout-1.11401
20. http://dailycaller.com/2016/08/24/facebook-is-determining-your-p
olitical-affiliation-tracks-your-activity/
21. http://www.pnas.org/content/111/24/8788.full
22. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/oct/21/russia-social-me
dia-activism-blacktivist
23. Italian voters have favored a political party that has NO quality
other than being BUMMER through and through: https://www.nyti
mes.com/2018/02/28/world/europe/italy-election-davide-casalegg
io-five-star.html.
24. Shortly before this book went to the printer, a horrifying school
shooting took place at a high school in Florida, and BUMMER
was right there, as it always is, probing for ways to damage
society: https://www.wired.com/story/pro-gun-russian-bots-flood-t
witter-after-parkland-shooting/.

ARGUMENT TEN: SOCIAL MEDIA HATES YOUR SOUL
1. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/saudi-musl
im-cleric-claims-the-earth-is-stationary-and-the-sun-rotates-aroun
d-it-10053516.html
2. https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/
3. The best-known quote from the alt-right writer “Mencius
Moldbug” goes: “In many ways nonsense is a more effective
organizing tool than the truth. Anyone can believe in the truth. To
believe in nonsense is an unforgeable demonstration of loyalty. It
serves as a political uniform. And if you have a uniform, you have
an army.”
4. The BUMMER ethos has bled into academic science as well.
Young scientists must now chase citation numbers in the same
way that aspiring social media influencers must seek followers.
5. http://www.businessinsider.com/new-facebook-mission-statement
-2017-6
6. http://time.com/574/google-vs-death/
7. The project continues as Calico, one of the Alphabet companies.
8. http://www.nationmultimedia.com/technology/Google-makes-mac
hine-learning-artificial-intellige-30273758/; https://www.cnbc.com/
2017/08/02/microsoft-2017-annual-report-lists-ai-as-top-priority/;
https://www.fastcompany.com/3060570/facebooks-formula-for-wi
nning-at-ai-/; https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-rein
vent-ai/amazon-steps-up-pace-in-artificial-intelligence-race-idUS
KBN1DV3CZ
9. https://komarketing.com/industry-news/ai-digital-transformation-t
op-marketers-priorities-2018/
10. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2017/10/2
9/saudi-arabia-which-denies-women-equal-rights-makes-a-robota-citizen/
11. Here is an old piece that describes how I reconcile my views on
the specialness of people with my support of abortion rights: http
s://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/the-latest-innocent-embry_b_8
547.html

ALSO BY JARON LANIER

Dawn of the New Everything
Who Owns the Future?
You Are Not a Gadget: A Manifesto
Wenn Träume erwachsen werden (When Dreams Grow Up)

About the Author

JARON LANIER is a scientist, musician, and writer best known for his
work in virtual reality and his advocacy of humanism and sustainable
economics in a digital context. His 1980s startup VPL Research
created the first commercial VR products and introduced avatars,
multiperson virtual world experiences, and prototypes of major VR
applications such as surgical simulation. His books Who Owns the
Future? and You Are Not a Gadget were international bestsellers,
and Dawn of the New Everything was named a 2017 best book of
the year by The Wall Street Journal, The Economist, and Vox. You
can sign up for email updates here.

Thank you for buying this
Henry Holt and Company ebook.
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.

Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup
For email updates on the author, click here.

TEN ARGUMENTS FOR DELETING YOUR SOCIAL MEDIA ACCOUNTS RIGHT
NOW. Copyright © 2018 by Jaron Lanier. All rights reserved. For information,
address Henry Holt and Co., 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010.
www.henryholt.com
Cover design by Nicolette Seeback
The Library of Congress has cataloged the print edition as follows:
Names: Lanier, Jaron, author.
Title: Ten arguments for deleting your social media accounts right now / Jaron
Lanier.
Description: First edition. | New York: Henry Holt and Company, [2018]
Identifiers: LCCN 2018007801 | ISBN 9781250196682 (hardcover)
Subjects: LCSH: Internet—Social aspects. | Social media.
Classification: LCC HM851 .L3579 2018 | DDC 302.23/1—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018007801
e-ISBN 9781250196699
First Edition: May 2018
Our e-books may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business
use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at
(800) 221-7945, extension 5442, or by e-mail at
MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.

CONTENTS

Title Page
Copyright Notice
Introduction, with cats
ARGUMENT ONE

YOU ARE LOSING YOUR FREE WILL

Welcome to the cage that goes everywhere with you
The mad scientist turns out to care about the dog in the cage
Carrot and shtick
The allure of mystery
Heaven and hell are made of other people
Bit as bait
Addiction, meet network effect
Addiction and free will are opposites
ARGUMENT TWO

QUITTING SOCIAL MEDIA IS THE MOST FINELY TARGETED WAY
TO RESIST THE INSANITY OF OUR TIMES

The BUMMER machine
The parts that make up the BUMMER machine
The problem is limited, so we can contain it

ARGUMENT THREE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU INTO AN ASSHOLE

Sooty snow
Meeting my inner troll
The mysterious nature of asshole amplification technology
The most masterful master switch
Go to where you are kindest
ARGUMENT FOUR

SOCIAL MEDIA IS UNDERMINING TRUTH

Everybody knows
When people are fake, everything becomes fake
BUMMER kills
ARGUMENT FIVE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING WHAT YOU SAY MEANINGLESS

Meaning ajar
Pod people
ARGUMENT SIX

SOCIAL MEDIA IS DESTROYING YOUR CAPACITY FOR EMPATHY

Digitally imposed social numbness
The lost theory in your brain
ARGUMENT SEVEN

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING YOU UNHAPPY

Why do so many famous tweets end with the word “sad”?
The wrong end of the BUMMER
High castle
ARGUMENT EIGHT

SOCIAL MEDIA DOESN’T WANT YOU TO HAVE ECONOMIC
DIGNITY

Double BUMMER
Baby BUMMER
Conflicted BUMMER
BUMMER blinders
Better than BUMMER
The corp perspective
The user perspective
ARGUMENT NINE

SOCIAL MEDIA IS MAKING POLITICS IMPOSSIBLE

Arc burn
Arab Spring
Gamergate
LGBTQ
Neither left nor right, but down
Black Lives Matter
If only this game were already over
ARGUMENT TEN

SOCIAL MEDIA HATES YOUR SOUL

I met a metaphysical metaphor
The first four principles of BUMMER spirituality
BUMMER faith
BUMMER heaven
Existence without BUMMER
BUMMER anti-magic
CONCLUSION: CATS HAVE NINE LIVES

Thank-yous
Notes
Also by Jaron Lanier

About the Author
Copyright

